================================================================================
christa-pike-tennessee-execution.html
Source: RenderedHtml  Paragraphs: 120  Words: 4361
================================================================================

SUMMARY

The death row inmate Christa Pike was in critical condition and receiving medical care, her lawyers said Thursday, a day after Tennessee’s failed attempt to execute her. The failed execution on Wednesday night was the state’s second bungled death penalty attempt this year, and Mr. Lee on Thursday said he was suspending executions — including Ms. Pike’s — to allow an independent review. Christa Pike’s botched execution is the second this year in which Tennessee has failed to execute an inmate using lethal injection drugs.

ARTICLE

Live Updates: Tennessee Inmate in Critical Condition After ‘Torturous’ Botched Execution, Lawyer Says
The inmate, Christa Pike, is “alive right now” after surviving an attempt to execute her by lethal injection, her lawyer said. He called on Gov. Bill Lee to reduce her sentence to life in prison.
By Billy Witz, Emily Cochrane, Jacey Fortin, Maia Spoto, Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs, Benjamin Mueller, Shaila Dewan, Rick Rojas and Yan Zhuang
Published 2026-10-01 14:18 UTC
https://www.nytimes.com/live/2026/10/01/us/christa-pike-tennessee-execution

Latest

Here’s the latest.

The death row inmate Christa Pike was in critical condition and receiving medical care, her lawyers said Thursday, a day after Tennessee’s failed attempt to execute her. They called for Gov. Bill Lee to reduce her sentence to life in prison, calling the botched attempt to end her life with two doses of pentobarbital “cruel and torturous.”

The failed execution on Wednesday night was the state’s second bungled death penalty attempt this year, and Mr. Lee on Thursday said he was suspending executions — including Ms. Pike’s — to allow an independent review.

Lawyers for Ms Pike said that did not go far enough, and urged Mr. Lee to take her off death row. Ms. Pike “has endured punishment greater than any other person in the history of the American death penalty,” said one of her lawyers, Randy Spivey.

Mr. Lee previously denied a similar request and his office did not immediately respond to a message seeking comment. Speaking to reporters earlier Thursday, he said the failed execution “shouldn’t have happened.” He added, “We should find out what happened and make those changes necessary to do what the people of this state want done.”

The governor said it was not immediately clear who would conduct the independent review, but said that the Tennessee Department of Correction appeared to have followed its procedures.

Ms. Pike, 50, was to become the first woman to be executed in Tennessee in more than 200 years. It was not clear why the execution attempt failed. Mr. Spivey said it had taken an hour to establish an intravenous line, and that he had counted seven needles used in her left arm alone.

In 1996, Ms. Pike was found guilty of torturing and murdering a classmate, Colleen Slemmer, in an attack carried out with her boyfriend and another friend. They slashed at Ms. Slemmer with a box cutter, carved a pentagram into her chest and removed a piece of her skull.

Ms. Slemmer’s mother, May Martinez, has long favored Ms. Pike’s execution. “Nobody remembers Colleen,” she told The New York Times last month.

Here’s what we’re covering:

In the final months of his term, Tennessee’s governor confronts another failed execution.

In the waning months of his tenure as Tennessee’s governor, Bill Lee is confronting another uproar over the state’s secretive lethal injection process.

On Thursday, he stopped all remaining executions and ordered an investigation into how Christa Pike, the lone woman on the state’s death row, survived two rounds of lethal drugs being injected into her. But Mr. Lee, who is term-limited, may not be around in office to see the investigation through.

Speaking to reporters a day after the failed execution, Mr. Lee acknowledged that things might change under a new governor. The Republican nominee to replace him as the leader of the deep-red state, Marsha Blackburn, had already called for the return of the electric chair in response.

“What I think should happen, while I’m the governor, is that we should determine the steps forward,” Mr. Lee said. “We should find out what happened and make those changes necessary to do what the people of this state want done.”

Asked about Ms. Blackburn’s comments, he declined to comment. Jerri Green, the Democratic nominee for governor, said she would keep a pause on all executions if elected.

The state’s handling of executions have been a recurring problem. In 2022, during his first term, Mr. Lee paused executions after the drugs used in the lethal injection process had not been tested properly. An independent investigation was conducted, and executions resumed in 2025 under a new protocol.

Then, earlier this year, Mr. Lee granted a temporary reprieve to one death row inmate after prison and medical staff failed to find a vein to inject the lethal drugs. He did not order an investigation or call for a broader pause after that failed execution.

Asked what was different this time, Mr. Lee replied, “We need to find out what happened, and until we find out, there’ll be a stay on executions.”

Most Americans favor the death penalty, but support has declined.

A majority of Americans are in favor of the death penalty for a person convicted of murder, public polling has found, though support has decreased in recent decades.

In the 1990s, about four in five Americans supported capital punishment. But by 2025, 52 percent of Americans favored the death penalty, according to polling by Gallup.

A 2026 survey by the Pew Research Center also found that about 66 percent of Americans favored the death penalty for people convicted of murder, which was about on par with its findings in 2020.

Wide gaps exist in support along partisan lines, with Republicans overwhelmingly in favor and Democrats more split in their opinions, Pew found.

As opposition to the death penalty has risen, a number of states have stopped executions.

Today, 23 states have abolished the death penalty, with Virginia becoming the first Southern state to do so in 2021. The state’s governor, Ralph S. Northam, a Democrat, pointed to racial disparities, noting that a majority of Virginia inmates executed in the 20th century were Black.

Now, executions are mostly conducted by a handful of states. According to the Death Penalty Information Center, Florida has executed 16 inmates so far this year, and Texas has executed six. Alabama, Arizona, Oklahoma and Tennessee have also carried out executions.

The Supreme Court briefly banned the death penalty in 1972 but restored it four years later. Since then, dozens of other countries have abolished capital punishment, according to the Death Penalty Information Center.

Gallup found in 2023 that, for the first time since it began asking the question in 2000, more Americans said they believed the death penalty was applied unfairly, rather than fairly.

America’s long history of executions includes many botched ones.

The failed execution of Christa Pike in Tennessee was the latest in a long string of botched executions in the United States, a history that extends almost as far back as executions themselves.

The failures have varied widely — trouble finding a vein; drugs that didn’t kill, as happened in Tennessee on Wednesday night; and gruesome scenes involving blood or flames. Ms. Pike snored and breathed for an hour before prison officials abandoned the effort to end her life with pentobarbital.

Even as the technology has evolved from ropes to firing squads to modern chemistry, the effort to spare prisoners a protracted, painful death is still far from reliable. While most executions end with the death sentence fulfilled, mistakes can be harrowing.

‘An Awful Sight’

New York carried out the United States’ first execution by electric chair in 1890 when it put William Kemmler to death at a prison in Auburn.

A front-page headline in The Buffalo Evening News said the execution “was an awful sight” and declared “the process a failure.” One doctor involved predicted, wrongly, that “there will never be another electrocution.”

The Evening News article described Mr. Kemmler as the “coolest man in the room” as he adjusted his tie and sat in the electric chair.

The current was turned on and the doctor soon announced that the man was dead. Moments later, in a panic, he asked for the current to be run again.

“This man is not dead,” the doctor cried, according to the Evening News account. “Faces grew white,” the article said.

Mr. Kemmler’s lips dripped, his chest moved, and he made a loud wheezing and groaning sound. Finally, he was again pronounced dead.

“FAR WORSE THAN HANGING,” The New York Times wrote on its front page on Aug. 7, 1890.

Flames and Smoke

One of the more horrific executions took place in 1983 in Alabama, when executioners sent three different jolts of electricity into John Evans III’s body. The first two failed to kill him, but rather sent flames flying from his leg and head.

Mr. Evans’s lawyer called the execution “a barbaric ritual” and said that his client had been “burned alive tonight by the state of Alabama.”

In 1990, a similarly disturbing execution took place in Florida, when fire and smoke emanated from the body of Jessie Tafero as he was put to death.

Unreliable Injections

The Death Penalty Information Center, a research group, says that lethal injection, introduced as a humane alternative to the chair, had the highest botch rate in executions between 1890 and 2010.

In 2018, Alabama prison officials were unable to insert an intravenous line into Doyle Hamm, who was terminally ill, and he became one of a small group to have survived an execution attempt. He died in prison of natural causes three years later.

In Oklahoma, John Grant vomited and shook for several minutes in 2021 during the state’s first execution since 2015, when it had mistakenly used the wrong drug to stop his heart.

The next year, again in Alabama, executioners tried for hours to find the veins of Joe Nathan James in 2022 as he lay in the death chamber. They eventually sliced into one of his arms in what is known as a “cutdown” in order to give him the fatal drugs, according to a private autopsy.

And in 2024, Idaho executioners tried for nearly an hour to insert an intravenous line into the arms, then hands, then legs of Thomas Creech, who was then 73. “I was thinking the whole time that this is really it,” he told The Times several months later. He remains one of eight people on Idaho’s death row.

New Method, New Problems

Alabama pioneered killing prisoners with nitrogen gas in 2024, the first new execution method in decades.

Kenneth Smith, one of three men convicted of murdering Elizabeth Dorlene Sennett, was the first prisoner killed by nitrogen gas. After the execution, the state prison commissioner, John Q. Hamm, said that “nothing was out of the ordinary from what we were expecting.”

But several witnesses told The New York Times that what they saw was disturbing.

“We were told by some people that worked" in the prison system “that he’d take two or three breaths, and he’d be out and gone,” said Mike Sennett, Ms. Sennett’s son. “That ain’t what happened. After about two or three breaths, that’s when the struggling started.”

Mr. Hamm and Mr. Sennett said they believed Mr. Smith might have tried to hold his breath to delay his death.

“With all that struggling and jerking and trying to get off that table, more or less, it’s just something I don’t ever want to see again,” Mr. Sennett said.

Witnesses reported that two other men who were later killed by nitrogen — Alan Miller in 2024 and Anthony Boyd in 2025 — shook and gasped for several minutes before they were pronounced dead. Alabama officials have maintained that the executions had followed protocol.

There are several possibilities for why the Tennessee execution failed.

The execution team went through at least seven needles trying to find a vein suitable for delivering doses of a lethal drug to Tennessee inmate Christa Pike, her lawyers said on Thursday.

Ms. Pike, who survived the botched execution on Wednesday night, was left with blistering and burning around the intravenous insertion sites that the execution team ultimately used to deliver the drug, the lawyers added.

Those details reinforced the sense among outside medical experts that Ms. Pike had survived the procedure because the drug, pentobarbital, probably poured into tissue surrounding the insertion sites instead of entering her bloodstream.

That could have prevented the drug from reaching the levels needed in her circulatory system to stop her breathing.

The drug may nonetheless have lowered her oxygen levels or weakened her circulation enough to cause permanent brain damage. Any leak of the drug into her tissue could also have caused chemical burns.

Ms. Pike’s lawyers said she was in critical condition and receiving lifesaving medical care.

Stephen Ferrell, one of her lawyers, said that while details of the execution attempt were consistent with there having been problems with the intravenous delivery, a number of other factors could have been involved.

The Tennessee Department of Correction said in a statement on Wednesday night that it “had followed every step of the state’s lawful, established execution protocol approved by the attorney general’s office.” Officials did not answer questions on Thursday about what went wrong with the administration of the drug.

Medical experts said there were signs that the two intravenous catheters, rather than directing the drug into Ms. Pike’s bloodstream, had allowed it to leak into the tissue surrounding the insertion point.

That could have been because of how or where the catheters were inserted, the fragility of Ms. Pike’s veins, or for another reason. Her lawyers said that doctors had always had difficulty finding veins during her blood draws and that Ms. Pike has a blood disorder that exacerbates that problem.

During the execution attempt, they added, Ms. Pike even tried to help the staff place the two IV lines.

“She over and over again said, ‘Please, try up on my shoulder higher, please try here, please try here,’” Randy Spivey, another of her lawyers, said. He added that Ms. Pike thanked them once staff members thought they had established the two lines.

Instances in which intravenous drugs leak into tissue under the skin are known as “IV infiltration,” and have been cited in past botched executions, including ones that caused extensive chemical burns.

Experts said that experienced doctors in a medical setting would typically be able to recognize signs of an IV infiltration as it occurred.

Members of the news media who served as witnesses to the execution attempt said that Ms. Pike at one point described a burning spot in her arm that felt as if it were going to burst and asked if that was normal.

“The pain in her arm should have been a bright red flag that the IV was infiltrating,” said Dr. Mark Heath, an assistant professor of anesthesiology at Columbia University Irving Medical Center.

Dr. Joel Zivot, a professor of anesthesiology at the Emory University School of Medicine who said that he had previously been retained by Ms. Pike’s lawyers as a medical expert, said that such an event would have caused the type of reaction that witnesses described.

The result, he said, could have been a highly alkaline solution leaking into Ms. Pike’s arm. “Essentially, they’ve injected bleach into the tissue of her arm,” Dr. Zivot said.

He added that he was speaking on his own behalf and not for Ms. Pike’s legal team, and that he had no direct knowledge of what happened during the execution attempt.

Having examined Ms. Pike’s medical records before the execution attempt, Dr. Zivot said that she was also susceptible to an IV infiltration. Ms. Pike’s lawyers had previously argued that the procedure could be agonizing for her in part because she has small veins.

“Her venous system was small, and there could be some fragility there,” Dr. Zivot said. “You push a lot of a caustic substance into a small vein like that, under pressure, it’s going to blow.”

He said chemical properties of the lethal drug, pentobarbital, mean that it can burn tissue and skin during executions.

Pentobarbital is a barbiturate that can treat seizures; it works by depressing activity in the nervous system. It is a mainstay drug for euthanizing animals. The drug has also been used in states with legal medical aid in dying.

Its main effect is to shut down electrical activity in the brain, including neurons in the brainstem that control breathing. The body enters a coma-like state, followed by respiratory failure and cardiac arrest.

The federal government adopted single-drug pentobarbital for lethal injections during the first Trump administration.

Under President Biden, the protocol was rescinded after a review by the Justice Department in January 2025 concluded that there remained “significant uncertainty” about whether using the drug for lethal injections “causes unnecessary pain and suffering.”

President Trump’s current administration has reinstated its use, and has said it will also use firing squads.

In Ms. Pike’s case, medical experts said it was also possible that there had been something wrong with the pentobarbital itself.

The primary manufacturer of pentobarbital has restricted the drug’s use in executions, the Justice Department review noted. As a result, states have turned to chemical companies and compounding pharmacies, which are more loosely regulated.

“Is it possible that the pentobarbital itself was somehow not constituted properly?” Dr. Zivot said. “Could it have degraded? Could it have expired? All of those things are possible.”

Almost as soon as lethal injection was first adopted in the United States in the late 1970s as a more medicalized, less painful method of execution, there were prolonged or botched executions.

In part, that was because the injections were often administered by correctional workers with limited medical training. Most doctors and anesthesiologists declined to advise or participate on ethical grounds.

In 2009, the maker of one of the key drugs, sodium thiopental, stopped production in the United States. Other drug companies prohibited the use of their products for executions.

States began scrambling to obtain the drugs, turning to compounding pharmacies and resorting to legally questionable arrangements like loaning the drugs to one another and importing drugs labeled for veterinary use. At one point, the Drug Enforcement Administration even seized Georgia’s supply of lethal injection drugs.

Prisoners argued in court that lethal injection did not eliminate pain and suffering, but only masked it. “It is not the most humane, it is the most humane-looking,” said Corinna Lain, a law professor and the author of “Secrets of the Killing State: the Untold Story of Lethal Injection,” published last year.

In response to the controversies, states shrouded the process in secrecy, passing laws that kept the public from learning details such as how the drugs are obtained and what dosage is used.

Ms. Pike’s lawyers said on Thursday that they hoped records would be preserved that would allow them to learn how her execution had gone wrong. They said they had long warned in court that Ms. Pike’s medical conditions could cause problems, but that those warnings went unheeded.

Mr. Spivey, her lawyer, said that among the at least seven needles used to try to establish an IV line in Ms. Pike’s left arm alone was one that appeared to be bent when it was pulled from her arm after an unsuccessful attempt.

Whatever the reason the execution failed, medical experts said, the possibility that Ms. Pike had suffered the effects of a nonfatal dose of pentobarbital for an extended period created a risk for lasting brain injury.

“She could be facing profound medical complications,” Dr. Zivot said.

Pike said she rued a grisly crime. The victim’s mother wants her dead.

Everything changed for two women when Colleen Slemmer died three decades ago.

Ms. Slemmer, 19, had been studying at a Knoxville, Tenn., education program when three classmates lured her into the woods, tortured her and killed her.

Her mother, May Martinez, had already been uneasy about her daughter traveling hundreds of miles away from Jacksonville, Fla. The loss of her daughter, she said in an interview last month, was devastating.

“I’m not the same person I used to be,” Ms. Martinez said.

Christa Pike was the only person involved in the murder who was sentenced to death. In response to questions from The New York Times, she conceded that initially, she did not feel remorse. But over years of isolation, as a result of being the lone woman on death row, she said she had grown to regret her actions and work to make amends.

“Over years of sitting in here with deep contemplation and reflection, I know and understand the life that I have taken and how much it matters, how much it means, how many effects she could have had on the world, just like the effects I could have on the world,” Ms. Pike said.

Ms. Martinez, who fund-raised the money to drive to witness the execution, said she could not fathom Ms. Pike changing. She and her husband, Raul, remained firmly in support of the execution going forward.

On Wednesday, Ms. Martinez was on the grounds of the prison waiting for the execution. She did not say anything.

Christa Pike’s failed execution echoes another in Tennessee this year.

Christa Pike’s botched execution is the second this year in which Tennessee has failed to execute an inmate using lethal injection drugs.

In May, medical staff members tried to tap into Tony Carruthers’s veins but acknowledged after several attempts that they could not find a “suitable vein” for the drugs, the Tennessee Department of Correction said. Gov. Bill Lee, a Republican, then ordered that any execution of Mr. Carruthers be delayed for a year.

Mr. Carruthers was convicted in connection with three 1994 murders. His lawyer, Maria DeLiberato, later wrote in an opinion essay in The New York Times that she had witnessed her client in “agony” as the execution team tried to insert an intravenous line for over an hour.

Tennessee’s use of lethal injection had come under scrutiny for its effectiveness even before the attempted executions of Ms. Pike and Mr. Carruthers. In 2022, the state paused executions for more than two years after Governor Lee said prison officials had failed to properly test its lethal injection drugs. Inmates have sued the state over its new injection procedure.

Mr. Carruthers represented himself in a 1996 trial over the killings of Marcellos Anderson; his mother, Delois Anderson; and Frederick Taylor. All three were found buried in a Memphis cemetery.

The American Civil Liberties Union argued that Mr. Carruthers was “plainly neither competent to stand trial nor competent to defend himself.” Lawyers who tried to represent him for his trial said they endured personal attacks, which were later connected to Mr. Carruthers’s mental illness.

His case drew attention before the execution attempt because allies and lawyers argued that he had been wrongfully convicted. They said that his mental illness prevented him from understanding his legal situation and the execution.

Multiple judges denied requests for new forensic testing that allies and lawyers said could help prove Mr. Carruthers’s innocence, and the U.S. Supreme Court denied his request to stop the execution.

Critics of the death penalty seized on Mr. Carruthers’s failed execution. Laura Porter, the executive director of the U.S. Campaign to End the Death Penalty, said at the time that “Tennessee has effectively made the case against the death penalty.”

In an interview on Thursday, Ms. DeLiberato said that Mr. Carruthers was still struggling with having full feeling and mobility on one side of his body. She added that his legal team was working to have an outside doctor examine him.

“Having been in that room, knowing exactly where everyone’s standing, what it looks like, what it smells like, what it sounds like, it was a difficult evening for me,” Ms. DeLiberato said, “and I can only imagine it was difficult for Tony.”

An Idaho death row prisoner described living through a botched execution.

Thomas Creech had been imprisoned in Idaho for nearly 50 years, convicted of five murders in three states and suspected of several more, when he was wheeled into an execution chamber in February 2024. For nearly an hour, medical workers at the Idaho Maximum Security Institution struggled to insert an intravenous line to pump a deadly drug into his bloodstream before the proceedings were called off.

Starting with his arms, then his hands and finally his legs, they tried and failed to get a needle into a suitable vein. “The worst ones was when they got down to my ankles,” Mr. Creech said in an interview a few months after his botched execution. “I was thinking the whole time that this is really it. I’m dead. This is my day to die.”

Mr. Creech described what it was like to endure the repeated needle jabs, knowing that any of them — if successful — could mean he would be dead within minutes. He described fear, pain, and his commitment to keeping his focus on his wife, who was sitting just a few feet away in the witness room, behind a glass panel.

Mr. Creech, who is considered a serial killer and is one of the longest-serving death row prisoners in the country, has offered conflicting accounts about his crimes over the years. At one point, he testified that he had killed as many as 42 people, some of them on behalf of a motorcycle gang or as part of a satanic religious ritual. Later, he took back many of those supposed admissions and said he had been put up to the claims by a fame-seeking lawyer.

More recently, and in his interview with The Times, he has said that he believed he had killed seven people. He claimed that he was in the throes of drug abuse at the time and that his victims had all been involved in a gang-rape of his former wife, who later died by suicide.

On the books, though, he has been convicted of five murders, including the fatal beating of a fellow prisoner, David Jensen, in 1981, for which he was sentenced to death.

Mr. Creech described the moments before he was to be executed. He recalled looking over to his current wife through the glass, and trying to tell her that he was sorry. Then he remembered the execution team starting with his right arm and failing to find a usable vein. They moved on to his right hand, his left hand and then his ankles.

The team spent about 42 minutes trying to insert an IV line before the execution was called off, according to Mr. Creech’s lawyers.

When the execution was called off just before 11 a.m., Mr. Creech said, he had trouble believing that he had really survived.

“I thought maybe I might already be in the afterlife,” he said. “Even now, today, I stop and I have to catch myself and think, ‘Am I really dead? I was supposed to be dead on the 28th of February. Am I really dead, and this is part of the afterlife? Continued punishment for my sins that I’ve committed?’”
