================================================================================
best-movies-amazon-prime.html
Source: PreloadedData  Paragraphs: 33  Words: 3817/3819
================================================================================

SUMMARY

Sign up for our Watching newsletter to get recommendations on the best films and TV shows to stream and watch, delivered to your inbox. As Netflix pours more of its resources into original content, Amazon Prime Video is picking up the slack, adding new movies for its subscribers each month. (Scorsese’s “The Age of Innocence” is also streaming on Amazon.)

ARTICLE

The Best Movies on Amazon Prime Video Right Now
New films, and classics, just keep coming, but you don’t have to drill down to find the finest selections to stream. We’ll do the heavy lifting. You press play.
By Jason T. Bailey
Published 2020-09-10 05:52 UTC
https://www.nytimes.com/article/best-movies-amazon-prime.html

Sign up for our Watching newsletter to get recommendations on the best films and TV shows to stream and watch, delivered to your inbox.

As Netflix pours more of its resources into original content, Amazon Prime Video is picking up the slack, adding new movies for its subscribers each month. Its catalog has grown so impressive, in fact, that it’s a bit overwhelming — and at the same time, movies that are included with a Prime subscription regularly change status, becoming available only for rental or purchase. It’s a lot to sift through, so we’ve plucked out 100 of the absolute best movies included with a Prime subscription right now, to be updated as new information is made available.

Here are our lists of the best TV shows and movies on Netflix, and the best of both on Hulu and Disney+.

‘Frankenstein’ (1931)

Horror cinema was changed forever in the year 1931, when Universal — a scrappy studio known primarily for B-movies and programmers — went all in on monster movies. Tod Browning’s adaptation of Bram Stoker’s “Dracula” (also on Prime) set the template for every vampire movie to follow (doubly so for Bela Lugosi’s title turn), and James Whale’s take on Mary Shelley’s mad scientist novel, released nine months after, further solidified the template for Universal horror: moody, slyly funny, carefully crafted and sneakily poignant, thanks in no small part to Boris Karloff’s wounded work as the monster. Our critic called it “a stirring grand-guignol type of picture.” (Universal’s similarly beloved “The Invisible Man” is also streaming on Amazon.) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Damsels in Distress’ (2012)

Once upon a time, the “Barbie” mastermind Greta Gerwig was known not as the director behind a billion-dollar blockbuster, but as one of the most charismatic actresses on the indie film scene. Her talents are nicely showcased in this sharp-witted, frequently quotable comedy of manners and satire of campus life. The writer and director is Whit Stillman, who helped define smart, talky ’90s indies with his triple play of “Metropolitan,” “Barcelona” and “The Last Days of Disco”; this, his first feature in 13 years, was a welcome return to form. Gerwig is at her complicated best as Violet, who helps her friends (Megalyn Echikunwoke, Carrie MacLemore and Lio Tipton, all memorable) navigate the unfortunate men of the fictional Seven Oaks College; Adam Brody is likably squirrelly as the campus cad. (If you like female-forward comedy-dramas, stream “The Edge of Seventeen” or “Valley Girl.”) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘The Sheep Detectives’ (2026)

As our critic Alissa Wilkinson noted, a certain kind of movie has all but gone extinct: “family-friendly, PG-rated movies” that were “intended for the whole family to watch.” This gentle, charming mystery-comedy is a fine demonstration of what we’ve lost. The director Kyle Balda and the screenwriter Craig Mazin (adapting the 2005 novel “Three Bags Full” by Leonie Swann) tell the story of George (Hugh Jackman), a kind shepherd who unexpectedly turns up dead. But every night at bedtime, he read murder mysteries to his flock (voiced by a boisterous supporting cast, led by Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Bryan Cranston), who then help the seemingly clueless local constable (Nicholas Braun) solve his murder. As a premise, it sounds inane — “Babe” meets “Knives Out” — and perhaps it is. But the entire enterprise is undertaken with such good humor and quiet grace that it somehow plays. You’ll laugh, you’ll cry, you’ll believe that sheep can solve crimes. (For more fun yet melancholy family entertainment, stream “The Wild Robot.”) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Project Hail Mary’ (2026)

When Drew Goddard last adapted a novel by Andy Weir, the resultant film, “The Martian” was an earnest crowd-pleaser, with much of the drama rooted in the human need for company and companionship. This film, based on Weir’s 2021 novel of the same name, retains some of that quality, but its tone and style is shifted considerably by the directors Phil Lord and Christopher Miller, whose brainy irreverence made “21 Jump Street” and “The Lego Movie” into unlikely successes. Ryan Gosling stars as a middle-school teacher who is brought in to consult on an international effort to save the sun from losing its energy; over his loud objections, he becomes a last-minute addition to a crew of astronauts. Gosling’s charisma and self-aware wit have rarely been put to better use, while Sandra Hüller proves an unlikely but effective comic foil. Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Once Upon a Time in Hollywood’ (2019)

All of Quentin Tarantino’s films are, in their own way, valentines to the movies — steeped in the tropes and traditions of the films of his youth, and the ways that they influenced his perceptions of human behavior and the world around him. But this hangout movie and western riff is his most direct love letter, and specifically to the cinema of the late-1960s in which it’s set, spending a few days in the life of Rick Dalton (Leonardo DiCaprio), a TV cowboy whose career is on the skids; his stuntman and right-hand Cliff Booth (an Oscar-winning Brad Pitt); and his neighbor Sharon Tate (Margot Robbie). A.O. Scott praised its “ambling, shaggy-dog structure and the easygoing rhythm of its scenes.” (Tarantino’s “Reservoir Dogs” and “Pulp Fiction” are also on Prime.) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘One Battle After Another’ (2025)

Paul Thomas Anderson’s Oscar winner (nominated for 13, winner of six) and most acclaimed picture to date was in the works for decades, first getting into the filmmaker’s head in the form of the 1990 Pynchon novel “Vineland.” Over the years, that story evolved into Anderson’s tale of Bob Ferguson (Leonardo DiCaprio, pitch perfect), a burned-out formula revolutionary whose years of paranoia are finally borne out when a twisted military man (Sean Penn) organizes the kidnapping of Bob’s daughter, Willa (Chase Infiniti). The resultant “carnivalesque epic about good and evil, violence and power, inalienable rights and the fight against injustice” is the culmination of Anderson’s screen work to date, fusing the loosey-goosey friskiness of his early features with the more disciplined aesthetics and towering performances of his middle period. Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

x

‘Eephus’ (2024)

On paper, a group of middle-aged men getting together to play amateur baseball may not sound like riveting cinema. But these characters are developed with such singularity and sensitivity, and played with such next-door-neighbor familiarity, that their seemingly slight hopes and dreams attain end-of-the-world gravitas. They meet at the baseball diamond in the small town of Douglas, Mass., for their weekly games, but they won’t anymore; “Eephus” dramatizes the final innings they’ll play before their Soldier’s Field is bulldozed to make way for a new public school. There are no last-minute efforts to save the field, nor is there a big game whose outcome will change anyone’s life in any particular way. Instead, this is a movie about the act of playing and watching baseball, which involves a lot of hanging out, talking trash, eating garbage food and occasionally hitting a ball. Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Support the Girls’ (2018)

The writer and director Andrew Bujalski (“Funny Ha Ha,” “Computer Chess”) creates what looks like a sunny workplace comedy. But he’s up to something much slyer, a smart examination of class and gender politics in one of their most pointed playgrounds: a Hooters-style sports bar and grill, where customers leer at scantily clad waitresses while the manager, Lisa (Regina Hall), tries to keep temperatures cool (and maintain her own sanity). It’s a wise, winning comedy, with a particularly sparkling supporting turn by Haley Lu Richardson, a “White Lotus” favorite. (Hall also shines in “Girls Trip.”) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Shiva Baby’ (2021)

Rachel Sennott found her breakthrough role as a messy young woman who finds all of the potential land mines in her life exploding simultaneously at the shiva of a family friend in this nerve-racking comedy from the writer and director Emma Seligman. The single location and collapsed time frame give it the efficiency of a well-constructed stage play, but “Shiva Baby” is as tense as any thriller, with the strained small talk, copious side-eyes and unapologetic gossip augmented by nervous camerawork, jarring sound effects and a dissonant musical score. It’s rare for a film to balance such wildly divergent tones simultaneously — to interweave big laughs with gut-wrenching discomfort — but Seligman pulls it off. (For more smart comedy, stream “Modern Romance.”) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Death Becomes Her’ (1992)

A commercial disappointment upon its original release, this blend of science fiction and social satire subsequently found enough of a cult audience to spawn a Broadway musical. The film stars Meryl Streep and Goldie Hawn as old friends turned romantic rivals, whose shared quest for perpetual youth leads them to a magic potion from the mysterious Lisle von Rhuman, played by the convincingly youthful Isabella Rossellini. Turns out, immortality has its drawbacks. This was one of Streep’s first major comic roles, and she throws herself into the pratfalls and verbal jousts with abandon. Hawn, meanwhile, reconfirms why she is one of the funniest actors of her time. But the real surprise is Bruce Willis, who as the object of their affections eschews his customary smirk and swagger to turn his nebbishy doctor into an inspired comic creation. (If you love wild comedies, stream “Used Cars” and “Matinee.)” Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Collateral’ (2004)

What could have been a formulaic action flick is transformed into an unpredictable, introspective two-hander, thanks to the moody direction of Michael Mann and the thrilling performances of its leads. Go-to good guy Tom Cruise is frighteningly convincing as a businesslike contract killer, the kind of villain who never raises his voice and always gets the job done; Jamie Foxx is sympathetic as the cabdriver who becomes a combination of chauffeur and hostage. The best moments in “Collateral” are the quiet ones, in which these two characters contemplate their stations in life, and their limited options for changing them. “Mann makes thrillers the way that John Ford made westerns,” our critic wrote, “using genre as a way into meaning rather than as an escape.” (Mann’s “The Last of the Mohicans” is also on Prime.) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Atomic Blonde’ (2017)

Charlize Theron starred in this mash-up of a Bond-style spy thriller and a contemporary bone-smashing action movie, directed by the “John Wick” co-creator David Leitch. He carries over that franchise’s “lavishly violent, inventively choreographed fights,” including one corker using kitchen utensils and other household items (giddily if incongruently scored to George Michael’s “Father Figure”), another finding our heroine taking on an army of challengers in one seemingly unbroken take. It’s an ideal role for Theron, who channels all of her sensuality, toughness and physical grace into the role; John Goodman, Toby Jones, Eddie Marsan and James McAvoy appear in memorable supporting roles. Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Rain Man’ (1988)

Dustin Hoffman won his second Oscar for his meticulously wrought performance as Raymond Babbitt, an autistic savant who meets his brother Charlie (Tom Cruise) after the death of their father. But “Rain Man” is not a heartfelt, tear-jerking family drama; it’s “a becomingly modest, decently thought-out, sometimes funny film” in which Charlie, a small-time hustler, has to drag his brother on a cross-country road trip to fight what he feels is an unfair inheritance. In retrospect, though Hoffman collected all the awards and accolades, this is Cruise’s film — he’s the character who changes between the beginning and the end — and it’s a marvelous performance, expertly revealing and exploring the psychological cracks in the gleaming golden-boy persona he spent the 1980s perfecting. (If you like ’80s tear-jerkers, you can’t go wrong with “Beaches.”) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Blue Valentine’ (2010)

As the married couple Cindy and Dean, Michelle Williams and Ryan Gosling are “exemplars of New Method sincerity,” according to our critic, and “able to be fully and achingly present every moment on screen together.” Their director, Derek Cianfrance, tells this story in pieces as they come together and fall apart, in timelines separated by years of hard, unsatisfying living (but shot with only a month between them, an astonishing feat of physical and psychological acting). Aching and heartfelt, the film is an often upsetting yet undeniably powerful account of how not all love stories end in “happily ever after.” Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Blow Out’ (1981)

The director Brian De Palma took an “everything but the kitchen sink” approach to the conspiracy thrillers of the 1970s with his “flashy, eclectic” and ultimately tragic 1981 masterpiece, which cheerfully cribs elements of Chappaquiddick, Watergate and the Kennedy assassinations to create the hybrid story of a movie sound man (John Travolta, excellent) who accidentally tape-records what may have been a politically motivated murder. Nancy Allen gracefully transcends the clichés of her role as a prostitute, while John Lithgow is as scary as he’s ever been — which is no small statement. (DePalma’s “Carrie” and “Carlito’s Way” are also on Prime.) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Dirty Rotten Scoundrels’ (1988)

The 1964 comedy “Bedtime Story” wasn’t exactly a career highlight for Marlon Brando or David Niven, so it probably shouldn’t come as a surprise that this remake from the director Frank Oz has replaced it in the popular consciousness. “Scoundrels” takes the clever premise of the original — warring con artists team up and then compete for the affections and pocketbook of a scene-stealing mark (Glenne Headly) — and gives it several delicious twists, making full use of the comic gifts of Headly, Steve Martin and Michael Caine. An “enchanted featherweight folly,” it makes the case for better remakes: Rather than tampering with the classics, why not fix good ideas that were improperly executed? (For more laugh-out-loud comedy, stream “Borat” or “Fletch.”) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘The Blackcoat’s Daughter’ (2017)

Osgood Perkins (“Longlegs”) wrote and directed this snowy and chilling jigsaw puzzle of a movie, in which two seemingly unrelated stories of young women teetering on the edge of madness merge in unexpected (and satisfying) ways. Kiernan Shipka is a revelation as a boarding school freshman seemingly abandoned during winter break by her parents and driven to the brink by her feelings of rejection and fear. Emma Roberts is appropriately enigmatic as a capricious hitchhiker, en route to the school for reasons that become increasingly (and troublingly) clear. Read the review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Cape Fear’ (1991)

Martin Scorsese took on his first remake with this iteration of the 1962 potboiler from the director J. Lee Thompson, with Robert De Niro and Nick Nolte in the roles that had been played by Robert Mitchum and Gregory Peck. But Scorsese had no interest in a conventional thriller, so he juiced up this version with his trademark moral ambiguity, transforming Peck’s square-jawed good guy into a flawed adulterer who earns De Niro’s ire by purposefully failing in his duty as defense attorney. Throw in a scenery-chewing performance by De Niro and an astonishingly assured portrayal by a young Juliette Lewis as Nolte’s daughter and you’ve got a fascinating (and violent) fusion of Thompson’s suspense and Scorsese’s sensibility. Our critic deemed it “an essential work by one of our masters.” (Scorsese’s “The Age of Innocence” is also streaming on Amazon.) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘The Queen of Versailles’ (2012)

Perhaps the most trenchant (and entertaining) commentary on the 2008 financial crisis, this biting documentary concerns David and Jackie Siegel, an obscenely rich Florida couple who are in the process of building a comically outsized mansion when the real estate bubble bursts. The director Lauren Greenfield may very well trigger gasps and laughter about the couple’s insane consumption and their subsequent attempts to curb it. But she isn’t content to take cheap shots. She sees her subjects as both perpetrators and victims of a system of conspicuous capitalism, in which too much is somehow never enough. Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Chef’ (2014)

Jon Favreau began his career with intimate, indie comedy-dramas, yet he ended up at the helm of giant productions like “Iron Man” and “The Mandalorian.” This was something of a return to his roots, with Favreau writing, directing and starring as a chef who abandons his high-profile restaurant gig to get back to basics in a food truck. The sense of art imitating life is a bit much, but this low-key effort boasts plenty of charm, a handful of laughs and enjoyable appearances by Favreau’s famous friends. (For more indie comedy-drama, stream “Trees Lounge.”) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Bridesmaids’ (2011)

Kristen Wiig stars in and writes (with her frequent collaborator Annie Mumolo) this comedy smash from the director Paul Feig. Wiig is Annie, an aimless baker whose lifelong pal Lillian (Maya Rudolph) is getting hitched and asks Annie to serve as maid of honor. This duty sets off an uproarious series of broad comic set pieces and thoughtful introspection; both the comedy and drama are played to the hilt by an ensemble that includes Rose Byrne, Jon Hamm, Wendi McLendon-Covey, Ellie Kemper, Chris O’Dowd and an Oscar-nominated Melissa McCarthy. (For more wild comedy, stream “Joy Ride” or “Overboard.”) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Something Wild’ (1986)

This thrillingly unpredictable romantic comedy and crime movie mash-up from the director Jonathan Demme (“The Silence of the Lambs”) begins as a boy-meets-girl movie with a slightly psychosexual edge, seeming to tell the story of how a wild girl (Melanie Griffith) and a straight guy (Jeff Daniels) meet in the middle. Then Ray (a sensational Ray Liotta) turns up and hijacks the entire movie, turning it into something much darker and more dangerous. Throughout, Demme keeps the focus on his colorful characters and sharp dialogue. Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘The Silence of the Lambs’ (1991)

Few fictional characters have embedded themselves in the pop culture consciousness as firmly as Dr. Hannibal Lecter, the brilliant monster brought to bone-chilling life by an Oscar-winning Anthony Hopkins in Jonathan Demme’s 1991 adaptation of the Thomas Harris best seller. The film also won awards for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best Actress — a quintuple play only matched two other times in film history — all deserving, none perhaps more so than Jodie Foster, whose indelible portrayal of the rookie F.B.I. investigator Clarice Starling sharply combines small-town naïveté with quick-witted strength. Our critic called it “pop film making of a high order.” (Fans of smart horror will also enjoy “Let the Right One In.”) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘The Thing’ (1982)

The director John Carpenter loved the 1951 sci-fi-horror thriller “The Thing From Another World” — so much so that he had the characters in his 1978 breakthrough hit, “Halloween,” watch it on television. Four years later, he went a step further by directing this terrifying update of that snowy creature feature, which gets a considerable boost from the more realistic language, themes and gore afforded by the times, as well as the jaw-dropping advances in makeup and effects. But both versions work for the same reason: the skill with which they place their characters in the claustrophobic grip of an isolated location, and then squeeze. (Carpenter’s “They Live” is also on Prime.) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘The Long Goodbye’ (1973)

Robert Altman adapted Raymond Chandler’s late-period Philip Marlowe novel as only he could: idiosyncratically, by updating the hard-boiled story’s setting to the feel-good California of the 1970s and casting one of the era’s most of-his-time actors, Elliot Gould, in the role made famous by Humphrey Bogart. Purists resisted, and some critics scratched their heads. But Gould is brilliant, Altman’s direction is brash and confident, and this “tough, funny, hugely entertaining movie” homes in on the character’s essential, outsider nature, while ingeniously rethinking the conventions of the genre. Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Raging Bull’ (1980)

Robert De Niro won his second Academy Award for his fiercely physical and psychologically punishing performance in this searing adaptation of the autobiography of the middleweight champion Jake LaMotta. The stylish boxing sequences are visceral and overwhelming, shot and cut to approximate the disorientation and violence of the sport. But the most disturbing sequences are those of LaMotta in his home, terrorizing his wife, Vickie (Cathy Moriarty, in an electrifying debut) and terrifying his brother and manager, Joey (Joe Pesci, also remarkable). It’s a relentlessly downbeat piece of work, but the force of De Niro’s performance and the energy of Martin Scorsese’s direction are hard to overstate, or to forget. Our critic called it Scorsese’s “most ambitious film as well as his finest.” Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘The Taking of Pelham One Two Three’ (1974)

One of the greatest of all “gritty Gotham” tales — our critic called it “a movie that really catches the mood of New York and New Yorkers” — this darkly funny, white-knuckle thriller from the director Joseph Sargent concerns four armed men who take a subway car hostage, demanding a million-dollar ransom for the lives of the passengers aboard. Robert Shaw is coolly ruthless as the leader of the gang while Walter Matthau is at his hangdog best as the cynical transit cop hot on their trail. (For more old-school action, stream “The Train” and “The Great Escape.”) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Inherit the Wind’ (1960)

Our critic deemed Stanley Kramer’s adaptation of Jerome Lawrence and Robert E. Lee’s stage play (based on the notorious Scopes “monkey trial”) to be “triumphant,” its climax “one of the most brilliant and engrossing displays of acting ever witnessed on the screen.” The actors Fredric March and Spencer Tracy are in career-best form as the Bible-pounding orator and the agnostic defense attorney on opposite theological and philosophical sides of the evolution debate. Kramer cranks up the carnival atmosphere, to great effect, and pulls a rare (and entertaining) nonmusical supporting turn from Gene Kelly as an H.L. Mencken-esque newspaper reporter. (For more classic drama, stream “Bicycle Thieves” and “Wuthering Heights.”) Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.

‘Memento’ (2000)

Christopher Nolan made his first big splash with this, his second feature film, a stylish film noir riff that tells its familiar story in an exuberantly inventive way: In order to mirror the disorientation of its protagonist, Leonard (Guy Pearce), who has lost his ability to create new memories, Nolan tells the story by ordering its scenes in reverse chronology. As Leonard pursues an investigation of his wife’s murder, revelations fold back on themselves and betrayals become clear to the audience before they’re known to him. Yet even without that narrative flourish, “Memento” would be a scorching piece of work, loaded with sharp performances, moody cinematography and a noir-inspired sense of doom. Read our review. Watch it on Amazon.
