================================================================================
midterms-elections.html
Source: RenderedHtml  Paragraphs: 104  Words: 4565
================================================================================

SUMMARY

An NBC News/Telemundo poll released on Monday found that only 27 percent of registered Latino voters approve of President Trump’s current performance. Over 60 percent of these voters said they viewed the Republican Party negatively, the highest share since the summer of 2016, when 64 percent said the same. Democrats lead among likely voters in the Senate races in Texas and Alaska, two states that consistently vote Republican, the polls found.

ARTICLE

Trump Rallies in Nebraska to Try to Lift Republican Incumbents
By Bayliss Wagner, Chris Cameron, Emily Davies, Theodore Schleifer, Shane Goldmacher, Reid J. Epstein, Matt Zdun, Tim Balk, Caroline Soler, Anna Griffin, Ruth Igielnik, Sejal Govindarao, Patricia Mazzei, Sophia June, John Yoon and J. David Goodman
Published 2026-10-05 13:10 UTC
https://www.nytimes.com/live/2026/10/05/us/midterms-elections

Battle for the Senate

New Polling

Hispanic voters overwhelmingly disapprove of Trump.

An NBC News/Telemundo poll released on Monday found that only 27 percent of registered Latino voters approve of President Trump’s current performance.

Over 60 percent of these voters said they viewed the Republican Party negatively, the highest share since the summer of 2016, when 64 percent said the same.

The poll, conducted in late September by the Washington-area polling firms Hart Research Associates and Public Opinion Strategies, found that the Democratic Party’s image also declined among Latino voters over the same period, with the share holding negative views rising from 14 percent in 2016 to 42 percent last month. But most of that shift happened before the 2026 midterm cycle — views of the Democratic Party have remained relatively stable since then.

Views of the Republican Party, however, are 16 percentage points worse than they were in 2024.

About 60 percent of Latino voters said they would prefer Democrats to take the majority in the House of Representatives, essentially matching the share that said so in the fall of 2018. However, in a lone bright spot for Republicans, the party also gained some ground since then, with 35 percent of Latino voters now preferring a Republican-controlled Congress, up from 26 percent in 2018 — the highest level of Republican support in this series in a midterm year. Much of this movement may have come from the undecided share of Latino voters, which decreased from 14 percent in 2018 to 6 percent now.

The Democratic Party also holds sizable leads in voters’ views on which party would do a better job on nearly every issue tested, with the largest, 30 percentage points, related to health care. The only issue that the party does not hold an edge on is border security; there, Republicans and Democrats are tied.

These findings could be particularly important in Florida and Texas, where Democrats hope to pick up Senate seats and where Hispanic voters make up a large share of the electorate. Movement among Latino voters in those states could be a key factor in whether Senate control changes hands in November.

Democrats lead governor races deep in Republican territory, polls show.

One month until Election Day, voter dissatisfaction with the economy, concerns about political extremism and frustration with President Trump have Democrats within reach of flipping four Republican-held governorships, opening a wide lead in Iowa and an expanding advantage in Ohio among likely voters, according to new polls by The New York Times and Siena University.

In Texas, Gov. Greg Abbott, a Republican fixture in the state for decades, is now narrowly behind his Democratic challenger, Gina Hinojosa.

The Democratic candidate also has an advantage in the race for governor of Alaska. The only place surveyed where the Republican is ahead in the campaign for the governor’s office is Kansas, now held by a retiring Democrat.

The polls also show Democrats with an advantage in the Senate in these states, with Democrats ahead in Texas and Alaska, and with the edge in Ohio, while the races in Kansas and Iowa are neck-and-neck.

While national attention has fixated on the fight for control of Congress, governorships will be important heading into a wide open presidential election in 2028. Not only will governors influence the electoral process, they will help shape the redistricting wars that are likely to spill into 2027 and beyond.

The polling results underscore how Democrats have been able to push into states that have traditionally favored Republicans, as voters have soured on Mr. Trump amid frustration over the economy, rising gas prices and a deeply unpopular war in Iran.

Still, the polls show that even as many of the Republican candidates for governor are at a disadvantage, they are outrunning the difficult political environment. Mr. Trump’s approval rating stands at just 40 percent across the five states. In four of five states surveyed, the Republican candidates for governor are doing better than the president’s approval ratings.

Democrats, meantime, are boosted by broadly well-liked candidates who are, for the most part, seen as more politically moderate than their Republican opponents.

Texas

In Texas, for example, just 28 percent of voters worried that Ms. Hinojosa was too far to the left, compared to 45 percent who were concerned Mr. Abbott was too far to the right.

Gov. Abbott was expected to have an easy path toward re-election in a state that hasn’t put a Democrat in the governor’s office since Ann Richards, who served one term before losing to George W. Bush in 1994.

Ms. Hinojosa, an Austin lawyer and former school-board president, has tried to turn the election away from national culture-war issues toward affordability, support for public schools and a backlash against the rapid construction of power- and water-hungry data centers.

Mr. Abbott retains an enormous financial advantage, but since a Times/Siena poll in June, Ms. Hinojosa has picked up support among white voters, Hispanic voters, voters younger than 45 and independent voters.

Mark Rios, a 38-year-old Republican from Dallas, said he is supporting Ms. Hinojosa because he wants a fresh pair of eyes in office. He said he supported Mr. Trump in three elections but has seen higher gasoline prices since the president took office. The economy seems to be getting worse, he said.

“There needs to be a change,” Mr. Rios said.

Ms. Hinojosa is viewed far more positively than negatively in the state, though about a third of voters said they had not heard of or did not yet have an opinion of Ms. Hinojosa. By comparison, Texans know Mr. Abbott well after 11 years as governor and another 12 as attorney general. Forty-seven percent of voters viewed him positively, and another 47 percent viewed him negatively.

“It’s baffling to hear him say, ‘Oh, I’m fighting this and this and this.’ Dude, you’ve been there more than a decade, and your party has been in charge for forever. You’re the problem,” said Jeanette Fierro, a Democrat and hospital marketing director in Odessa, Texas.

Ms. Fierro, the daughter of immigrants from northern Mexico, said she knew little about Ms. Hinojosa when the campaigns began but believes Texans, particularly Hispanic voters, will embrace her if she can find the money to compete: “The more I have learned, as a Latina and a single mom, the more I like,” Ms. Fierro said. “She’s a chingona, you know? A badass.”

Iowa

The widest Democratic lead was in Iowa, where Rob Sand, the state auditor and the only Democrat holding statewide office, holds an advantage over Republican businessman and farmer Zach Lahn to succeed Gov. Kim Reynolds, a conservative Republican who is retiring after nine years in office.

Mr. Sand has built his campaign around a bipartisan persona and a promise to address government accountability and the economy. He’s benefiting from high voter appeal: more than half of Iowa’s likely voters view him positively, including more than 20 percent of Republicans.

Since June, Mr. Sand has grown his support across nearly every demographic group. He is now ahead among voters over 65, a group that typically tilts Republican.

Iowa hasn’t elected a Democratic governor since 2006.

Ohio

In Ohio, which also hasn’t voted in a Democratic governor in 20 years, a summer of bad news for the president and his party has taken a toll on the Republican candidate for governor.

The June Times/Siena poll showed billionaire pharmaceutical entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy and the Democratic former state health director, Amy Acton, neck-and-neck. Now she has an advantage, including 11 percent of Mr. Trump’s 2024 supporters who say they intend to vote for Ms. Acton. She also has a significant lead with independent voters.

Alexandria Hensley, 27, described herself as conservative and voted for Mr. Trump two years ago, but said she wants a governor who will work toward “the middle ground.”

A domestic violence worker from Cincinnati, Ms. Hensley said her concerns were less about Mr. Ramaswamy and more about the economy, the spread of data centers and politics broadly. She said social issues such as whether transgender girls should be allowed to play on girls’ teams never mattered to her as much as politicians seem to think.

”Everyone seems to focus so much on what we disagree on, when I think we all tend to agree on more basic things,” she said.

Alaska

In Alaska, Democrat Jonathan Kreiss-Tomkins led a crowded August primary field and has maintained that advantage over three Republicans, Bernadette Wilson, a businesswoman and conservative radio host; Dave Bronson, a former Anchorage mayor; and Treg Taylor, a former Alaska attorney general, the poll found.

A former state legislator who helped lead a bipartisan coalition in the statehouse and won repeatedly in a district carried by Mr. Trump, Mr. Kreiss-Tomkins has promised his cabinet will include a balance of Democrats, Republicans and independents. All three of the Republican candidates are populist conservatives in the mold of Mr. Trump. Alaska’s current Republican governor, Mike Dunleavy, is barred from re-election by term limits.

Alaska uses ranked-choice voting, but while Democrats have united around a single candidate, Republicans have not. Ms. Wilson urged Republicans to coalesce around one person, fearing that multiple candidates will benefit the Democrat. Mr. Bronson and Mr. Taylor declined, arguing that Republicans can use the system to their advantage as long as their potential voters don’t rank Mr. Kreiss-Tomkins.

Anita Baker, a retired U.S. Army lieutenant colonel in Eagle River, Alaska, who supports Ms. Wilson, said she fears her fellow conservatives won’t understand the system. “You could add a couple of expletives to how worried I am,” she said.

Ms. Baker said she fears the damage a Democratic governor could do and still supports Mr. Trump.

“He might say things that make my eyebrows go up or make me scratch my head sometimes, but the policies are there,” she said.

The Times/Siena poll, which simulated the ranked-choice voting process, showed the three Republicans collectively winning a larger percentage of initial responses but Mr. Kreiss-Tomkins with a slight lead over Ms. Wilson after three rounds. He’s trying to become the youngest governor in Alaska history at 37 and the first Democrat elected to lead the state since 1998.

Kansas

Republicans can hope for their own flip in Kansas, where outgoing Gov. Laura Kelly, a Democrat, won tight races in 2018 and 2022 despite the state’s conservative leanings. The Times/Siena poll showed the Republican state senate president, Ty Masterson, with a four-percentage-point lead over the Democrat, fellow state lawmaker Cindy Holscher.

Chris Martsolf, a 53-year-old commercial general contractor from Wichita, Kan., said Republicans are about as disorganized as Democrats these days. But after eight years of Democratic control, the governorship needs to go back to Republicans, he said.

“If we don’t win midterms, there probably will be no more Republican Party,” he said.

Voters in Kansas were the least likely to say their state is headed in the wrong direction, and a majority of Republicans say the economy in Kansas is excellent or good.

Mr. Masterson also benefits from some crossover appeal. He has the support of 8 percent of voters who say they also plan to support the Democrat in the Senate race, the Rev. Adam Hamilton.

Right now, Republicans hold 26 of the nation’s 50 governorships, so this year’s elections could tip the balance of power in statehouses. States operate independently, and the political philosophies within either major party can vary greatly from state to state. A Democrat on the liberal West Coast is very different than one in the Midwest or Southeast.

Still, Democratic organizers believe holding a majority of governorships would give them an additional bulwark against Mr. Trump on policies that cross state lines, including immigration enforcement, House gerrymandering and the rollback of health care funding and environmental regulations.

Here are 8 takeaways from the Times/Siena polls.

The path to Democratic control of the Senate is widening as the party’s fortunes improve in five reliably Republican states, according to new polls from The New York Times and Siena University.

Underneath the hood of the polling results, which showed Democrats effectively tied in states that were once seen as long shots, and with at least an edge in states seen as tossups, there are more data points to concern Republicans as they try hold on to their Senate majority.

Even in states President Trump won by double digits in 2024, voters — including many who backed Mr. Trump — appear to be discontented with the economy and uncertain about Republicans’ handling of other issues, among them artificial intelligence and immigration.

Here are eight key findings from the polls in Alaska, Iowa, Kansas, Ohio and Texas.

Voters are not sold on the economy. Especially in Alaska.

Voter agreement cuts across age, education level, gender and race. In the five states, they tend to be united on this much: their state’s economies are not in great shape.

The assessment was particularly bleak in Alaska, where nearly three-quarters of voters said the state’s economic conditions were only fair or poor.

In Iowa, Kansas and Ohio, two-thirds or more of those surveyed rendered the same judgment on their state’s economic conditions. Voters took a slightly more optimistic view in Texas, where 44 percent of voters said the economy was excellent or good, and 56 percent said it was only fair or poor.

In Texas, Talarico and Paxton are running even on immigration.

Mr. Trump had a 10-percentage-point advantage on voters’ trust to handle immigration in Times/Siena battleground polls conducted in September 2024. Republicans’ edge has shrunk to just three points in the most recent round of Senate battleground polls.

The dynamic is especially striking in Texas, where 12 percent of voters listed immigration as the top driver of their vote, more than in any other state. Voters in Texas are evenly split on who they trust more to handle the issue, the Republican Senate candidate, Ken Paxton, or the Democratic candidate, James Talarico.

Republican frustration with Trump is evident, particularly when it comes to gas prices in the Midwest.

Across the five states, Mr. Trump’s approval rating sat at just 40 percent. That included 20 percent of voters who supported him in 2024, but who now said they disapproved of his job performance.

Even as Mr. Trump’s numbers have fallen since the summer, his base has largely continued to back him.

That makes it even more striking to see half of Republicans in Iowa — and nearly half of Republicans in Ohio and Kansas — disapprove of the president’s handling of gas prices. Across all other issues, in every other state polled, Republicans did not come anywhere close to this level of disapproval.

In Ohio, Sherrod Brown has a sizable advantage on data centers.

Sherrod Brown, a Democratic former senator trying to stage a comeback in Ohio, has focused heavily on data centers in his race against Senator Jon Husted, a Republican — and it seems to be working in his favor.

Mr. Husted supported data center investments in his state while serving as its lieutenant governor from 2019 to 2025, and Democrats have cast him as the “face of data centers” in Ohio. (Mr. Husted has tried to recover on the issue by sponsoring a bill intended to protect consumers from high energy costs linked to data centers.)

Most Ohio voters say they are opposed to data center construction. And by a wide, 11-point margin, voters favor Mr. Brown over Mr. Husted to handle the issue, the largest advantage for any candidate across the states when it comes to data centers. Even 11 percent of Republicans in the state say they prefer the Democrat’s position.

Still, only 3 percent of voters in Ohio said that data centers were the most important issue driving their vote. Though small, that proportion was much higher than in any other state, where hardly any voters mentioned the issue.

Most say the Democratic Party is too far to the left …

Fifty-two percent of voters across the five states said the Democratic Party was too far to the left ideologically, in a year in which voters nominated progressives or democratic socialists in several primaries.

… but they don’t see specific Democratic candidates that way.

Voters tend to view their own members of Congress more favorably than they view Congress overall, and that trend seems to extend to Senate candidates. Only 35 percent of voters across the five states said the Democratic nominees running in their states were too far to the left.

Democrats have an edge on character.

In all five states, the Democratic Senate nominee edged the Republican nominee on the question of who had better character. In some Senate races, the gap was slim. But in Texas, the Democratic nominee, James Talarico, held a 23-point lead over the scandal-plagued Republican nominee, Ken Paxton, on the question of character.

The most-liked Democratic nominee is from Alaska.

The candidate contrast was stark in Alaska, where Mary Peltola, a former congresswoman who has faced allegations of staff mistreatment, was viewed favorably by a majority of voters, including 15 percent of Republicans. By a wide margin, she was also seen as more trusted than Dan Sullivan, the Republican nominee, to act in the best interest of ordinary Alaskans.

Senate races in 5 Republican states are tilting toward Democrats, polls find.

A month before the midterm elections, Democrats have opened leads or battled their way to ties or near-ties in five reliably Republican states where they are trying to flip Senate seats to win control of the chamber, according to new New York Times/Siena University polls.

Democrats lead among likely voters in the Senate races in Texas and Alaska, two states that consistently vote Republican, the polls found. They have an edge in Ohio, which has been tilting rightward for years. Republicans have a slim edge in Iowa, and Democrats are neck-and-neck with Republicans in Kansas, which has not voted for a Democratic senator since 1932.

President Trump’s deep unpopularity, disapproval of the Iran war and frustration over high gas prices and the cost of living are reshaping the electoral landscape, the polls found.

Taken together, the new polls suggest that the Democrats have multiple paths to retake the Senate majority, despite a challenging map that had favored Republicans going into the midterms. To win Senate control, Democrats need to flip four Republican-held seats while holding on to their current seats in three battleground states, a difficult task.

But there are signs that it is increasingly possible. On Friday, a top Republican super PAC pulled its money out of the Senate race in North Carolina, signaling that the party is not optimistic about being able to defend its seat there. The super PAC, called the Senate Leadership Fund, plans to redirect resources to Kansas, where Republicans have growing concerns about holding their seat.

The polling suggests Democrats are increasingly competitive in these Republican states.

[Follow all of the latest polls heading into November’s elections.]

In Texas, James Talarico, a Democratic state representative, has opened up a six-percentage-point lead in the race against Ken Paxton, the scandal-plagued attorney general and Republican nominee who has been strongly supported by Mr. Trump.

Austin Vaughn, 30, an independent voter who works for a nonprofit and lives in the Houston area, said he voted for Mr. Trump in 2024 but plans to support Mr. Talarico this fall.

“He’s the one actually listening and hearing that those are problems,” said Mr. Vaughn, referring to rising costs. “And the Republicans on the other side are gaslighting everyone and saying they aren’t real problems.”

In Alaska, former Representative Mary Peltola, a Democrat, is ahead of Senator Dan S. Sullivan, the Republican incumbent, by seven percentage points. The polling aligns with the results of the state’s nonpartisan primary in August, when Ms. Peltola and Mr. Sullivan appeared on the same ballot, and she won by eight points. A majority of voters there said that they viewed Ms. Peltola favorably; the poll was conducted after allegations of poor treatment toward her staff came to light.

In Ohio, former Senator Sherrod Brown, a Democrat, holds a narrow three-point edge in his comeback bid against Senator Jon Husted, the Republican incumbent, with voters saying they prefer the well-known Mr. Brown over Mr. Husted on nearly every issue in the poll. Mr. Brown has an 11-point advantage over Mr. Husted on the question of who would better handle the increasingly potent political issue of data centers, the poll found.

And in Iowa and Kansas, two Midwestern states that have been hit hard by the economic effects of Mr. Trump’s policies, the races are neck-and-neck. In Iowa, Representative Ashley Hinson, the Republican nominee, has a one-point edge over State Representative Josh Turek, the Democrat. In Kansas, the Rev. Adam Hamilton, the Democratic nominee, and Senator Roger Marshall are locked in a dead heat.

The polls suggest Democrats are performing well with independent voters, who often decide elections. Across the five states, Democrats hold a 24-point advantage with the group. On issue after issue, independent voters say they trust Democrats over Republicans — including a 30-point advantage on which party does what’s best for ordinary people in their state.

In all but one of the states, Democratic candidates are seen as less ideological than their Republican counterparts. In Ohio, voters were about equally concerned that the candidates were too ideological; 37 percent said they thought Mr. Brown was too far to the left, and 36 percent said Mr. Husted was too far to the right.

It is a striking transformation in five states Mr. Trump won every time he was on the ballot. In Ohio, which he carried with 55 percent of the vote in 2024, only 38 percent now approve of Mr. Trump’s job performance, down from 44 percent in June.

Soaring gas prices, which were driven above $4 a gallon by the Iran war, have continued to hurt the president’s popularity, particularly in the Midwest. About half of Republicans in Iowa and Ohio said that they disapproved of Mr. Trump’s handling of gas prices. Across all five states, Democrats are now more trusted than Republicans to handle the cost of living — reversing the advantage Mr. Trump had on the issue in those states just two years ago.

“You used to be able to get a house — a pretty good house — for under $200,000,” said Bethany Deines, a 58-year-old Democrat in Hamilton, Ohio, who supports Mr. Brown for Senate. Homes in her area now go for more than double that, she added: “I mean, it’s just not manageable for everyday people to be able to really even afford quality housing.”

Perhaps nowhere is Democrats’ advantage more remarkable than in Texas, where Mr. Talarico has been boosted by a growing share of voters — now 60 percent — who say that he has the right kind of moral values, up from 51 percent in June.

Many establishment Republicans, including Senator John Cornyn, whom Mr. Paxton defeated in a primary, warned this year that Mr. Paxton was a flawed candidate who could put what had been seen as a safe Senate seat at risk.

The poll suggests that may have proved true, with a majority of Texas voters saying Mr. Paxton does not have good character. And 45 percent say his past scandals, including his impeachment over corruption charges and a messy divorce from his wife, make them question supporting him — or mean they will not support him at all.

But Mr. Paxton will have a big financial advantage heading into November. Republican groups recently began spending large amounts of money to prop him up, reserving about $190 million in ads supporting him for the final two months of the race.

About half of voters across the five states — 49 percent — say they want a candidate who can provide a check on the president, according to the polls. Just 27 percent say they would prefer candidates who support Mr. Trump.

Nowhere is that more apparent than Iowa, where 53 percent of likely voters, including nearly 20 percent of Mr. Trump’s own supporters, say they want a candidate who can provide a check on the president.

Brayden Blocker, an 18-year-old Republican and college student in Iowa City, said Congress should be “less extreme.”

“With the new Congress coming in, I would say that I think it should just be more moderate members that aren’t necessarily, like, just what Trump wants to do,” he said. “It’s what their constituents want to do instead.”

The divide in voter concern about parties being too ideological is particularly stark in Kansas, where voters are more likely by a 10-point margin to say that the Republican is too far to the right than to say that Mr. Hamilton, the Democrat, is too far to the left.

Senator Marshall, the state’s Republican incumbent, is an obstetrician-gynecologist who filed lawsuits against hundreds of patients over outstanding bills, leading to the arrest of at least 81 patients, a New York Times investigation found. That has become an issue in the campaign.

Half of voters also say they worry that he will support Mr. Trump too much.

“You couldn’t pay me enough money to back Donald Trump or anybody that backs him,” said Alexis Price, 42, a travel adviser in Kansas City who said she does not align with either party. “I think what the Republican Party and a lot of the Republican nominees are doing is disgraceful and disgusting. And I have to vote to my conscience over any sort of party affiliation.”

Across the five polled states, Democrats hold an advantage on nearly every issue, including on the cost of living, which is the single most important issue to voters, along with the economy. Even Republicans’ edge on immigration is slipping. Republicans held just a three-point advantage on the issue across the five states.

Among the strongest measures for Democrats is that voters say that they trust them more to do what’s best for ordinary voters. In Alaska, Ms. Peltola has a eight-point advantage on that question.

Ms. Peltola is viewed very favorably by a majority of Alaskans, including 15 percent of Republicans, and has managed to grow her lead in a state that nonetheless favors Republicans continuing to hold control of the Senate.

“I see her out in the community,” said Jessica Romer, a 38-year-old Democrat in Anchorage. “And I just really like that she’s interacting with people, like getting to know them and what their needs and wants are.”

Supplemental Graphic

Battle for the House

The campaign arm of House Democrats is targeting G.O.P. seats with a $13 million ad buy this week.

The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee is planning to spend $13 million in the coming week in 35 House races, according to an ad-buy plan shared with The New York Times. On this buy, the campaign arm of House Democrats is focusing on offense, spending in 21 seats held by Republicans and 14 by Democrats.

The ad buy includes some new districts — including, most notably, Pennsylvania’s First District, in suburban Philadelphia, a seat held by Representative Brian Fitzpatrick. One of the more centrist Republicans in the House, Mr. Fitzpatrick is among only a few Republicans seeking re-election in a seat that President Trump lost in 2024.

The other new districts are California’s 48th, Michigan’s Fourth and Seventh, and New York’s 19th. New rules from the Supreme Court this year allow congressional candidates to coordinate for the first time on advertising with the parties.

More Election News
