================================================================================
los-angeles-mayor-election.html
Source: RenderedHtml  Paragraphs: 41  Words: 3421
================================================================================

SUMMARY

And does the city believe in its mayor? If you’re going to advance anything big as a mayor, you have to have a coalition on the City Council. Look, we know this: There are three major areas that a city, a mayor have to deal with.

ARTICLE

Opinion | Who Should Be Los Angeles’s Next Mayor?
Times Opinion convened a panel of experts to help voters make sense of the race.
By New York Times Opinion
Published 2026-10-08 09:03 UTC
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2026/10/08/opinion/los-angeles-mayor-election.html

Karen Bass

Nithya Raman

Our Panel’s Ratings

We asked panelists to rate the leading candidates on how they would approach governing. Each chart reflects an average of their individual ratings.

This is the most frustrated L.A. residents and L.A. voters have been in the 40 years that I have been observing and studying Los Angeles. At Loyola Marymount, we conduct one of the largest annual surveys in urban America on Los Angeles, more than 2,000 residents every single year. When we ask about trust in government, efficiency in government, does government care about you, can government solve problems — all have declined dramatically. Voters have no belief in the ability of local government to improve their lives.

In any mayor’s race, we ask the question: Is the city working for us? Are residents able to get basic services? And does the city believe in its mayor? And I think all of those questions are up for debate right now because a lot of community members, people that we talk to every day, are feeling that services are not being delivered.

Everybody is either frustrated, unhappy or angry. And as a consequence of that, they’re uninspired by leadership. A mayor’s race often can be a moment of civic inspiration and of civic imagination, right? In 2013, Eric Garcetti had a vision for Los Angeles that he was selling to voters: a forward-leaning city. In 2005, Antonio Villaraigosa had a very clear vision of Los Angeles. “Come dream with me” was sort of the slogan of his inauguration speech. And in this campaign, I’m not seeing anybody articulating a vision for Los Angeles and trying to sort of lead people to a common civic mission.

Los Angeles has undergone two major catastrophes in the last two years — first, the ones with the Palisades and the Eaton fires. And even though the Eaton fire was in Pasadena, it’s still part of our larger community. The second major crisis we’ve had most recently is the Lineage fire in Boyle Heights, where a cold storage warehouse burned and the decomposing food took a long time to clean up. That’s of great concern to the community right now because it kind of traffics a longstanding history of people being promised so much by these candidates.

Right now, if she were to get elected today, her mandate is she’s not Bass. But that’s not the same thing as an agenda, and that’s something she should focus on building in the final weeks of the campaign. She can be very, very good at articulating a vision for Los Angeles when she wants to; she has a sense of the future, of what a multiethnic, complex city is supposed to be. And if she can articulate that, that will be a real strength. She is also very good at identifying and fixing the things that prevent government from working right.

I think if Raman wins, it’s notable that she’s not endorsed by her colleagues on the City Council. If you’re going to advance anything big as a mayor, you have to have a coalition on the City Council. And if you’re a council member that wants to advance anything big, you have to work with the mayor. So how does she reset relationships should she win, not just with the council, but also with labor and with the business community, in order to make some big moves and shift this mood?

I feel like she’s still learning how to be a politician. She has learned how to deliver her message better. I definitely do think that she will bring an outsider’s perspective. We haven’t really seen that in the city leadership. Most of the mayors that we’ve had have all had those traditional coalitions and things behind them, though she has very interesting people that are behind her, including the pro-transit community and environmentalists. We’re watching, I think, the plane being built in real time.

She understands policy and systems at a very minute level. And I think that was the strength of hers going into this race. I would say the biggest question, I think, from my perspective as a civil-rights leader in South L.A., is: Can we trust you on issues around race and equity in our community? I’ve seen her doing more work with the immigrant and primarily Latino community. But what about the other, more solidly Black communities that have been a part of this coalition bloc?

Bass has a truly cross-sector coalition. She has the business community behind her. She has older white liberals behind her. She has sizable support from the Latino community. So what is she going to do with that cross-sector coalition should she win? Every re-elected mayor has about a year, year and a half to do something really interesting and sort of ride that wave of optimism that may come from a victory. What will she do with that?

Mayor Bass spent a lot of time in Washington as a legislator. It’s like if you were used to driving a gas-powered car, and you came back to L.A. and the whole city is an electric vehicle. You have to learn how to work the machinery. Over the last couple of years, she’s been trying to figure out how the machinery actually works. If there is a second term, it’s got to be about implementation. We know what did not work around homelessness. What big tweaks are you making to actually move that forward? We know you did the executive directives around land use. But improving permitting is not the same as completing units. So if she wins a second term, the challenge would be how to get more completed units online. The strength is she knows the machinery better. The question I think most people are asking is: If we give you a second term, can you actually effectively drive this car, which is L.A. city? Can you actually effectively manage the department managers to get what we need?

Bass has tremendous relationships at all levels of government. She has been effective at leveraging that for support from Sacramento and Washington. That is a huge asset, and if Democrats retake the House and Senate, it be very helpful. The mayor’s biggest weakness is that she acts more like the legislative leader she was for two decades than as the executive and a manager a big city mayor is supposed to be.

One of the things that’s really disappointing about this race is that I had thought that with two smart, policy-savvy, progressive candidates, we would have some thoughtful conversations about housing policy, and we’re not. And to the extent that we have, it’s basically been: Should we build any apartments in what are exclusively single-family neighborhoods now? That’s a question, but there’s so many others that aren’t being asked.

Look, we know this: There are three major areas that a city, a mayor have to deal with. First and foremost is public safety. Second is land use. And then the third area is city services. Public safety, I think, is going OK for Bass. It’s that land use, the inability to build housing and affordable housing. One of the root causes with homelessness is the rent. That’s going to be Bass’s legacy if she gets re-elected, whether she wants it or not. She cannot give up on that issue of homelessness and housing.

The basics around housing are the three P’s, right? How are you doing protection, preservation and production? And what I’m hearing with Raman, it’s a lot about production. Her biggest challenge would be convincing these neighborhood associations that you could actually build density in your area and not disrupt the historical fabric of your neighborhood.

So I’m going to come at it a little bit differently, as someone who does work with the developer community quite a bit. I’ve worked for affordable housing developers and regular market-rate developers. And I will tell you that people aren’t interested in building in Los Angeles. A lot of times, the people who are opposed to a project, they are very savvy, with requirements and conditions on these projects, knowing that they won’t get built. We need a real sherpa in city hall to get us over the hump, to rebuild the trust of people who want to invest in our city at all levels of housing and bring all parties to the table, especially developers. And I think we have to figure out that we can’t let the perfect be the enemy of the good.

The other big question is: What generation do we have at the front of our minds when we’re talking about housing policy? Are our decisions on housing policy being dictated by the needs of people my age, who are homeowners? Or are they being dictated by thinking about kids who are in kindergarten and high school now, and what Los Angeles they get to live in or not?

The median age right now to buy a home in Los Angeles is much higher than in most of the country. I have two daughters in their 20s. To know that they would not be able to buy a home — a single-family dwelling or even a condo — for a long time is concerning. When younger voters are looking at this race, I think they’re thinking about that.

It is a generational issue. Most of the people in Los Angeles rent. But we’re kind of still beholden to the homeowners. It has huge implications: There is a concentration of intergenerational wealth into the hands of a minority of the city, which was on display with the first debate these candidates had, which was hosted by a homeowners’ association.

The most important thing the mayor needs to do — and it isn’t easy, cheap or fast — is to create enough long-term housing for people who are currently unhoused. Inside Safe isn’t housing. It is temporary shelter, in a motel or hotel room, to get people safely off the streets. The city should focus more on leasing apartment units, for a likely cheaper cost, and it is actually long-term housing.

While L.A. overall needs a much greater supply of housing, preventing homelessness could best be achieved by specifically constructing units that offer below-market rent.

The next mayor needs to focus on a sustained cost-of-living reform program that decreases the cost for all renters in L.A. Too many families find themselves in precarious housing situations where they need reliable, clean and affordable pathways to long-term housing, including public housing, new development and land trust options.

The next mayor needs to build a robust coalition of serious public and private leaders to streamline the intake pathway, and deploy prevention dollars — like basic income, or utility rates cuts and freezes to stabilize affordability — alongside coordinated services.

It’s the major event in Los Angeles since Covid. And it has structured the narrative about how a city can respond, how a city can prepare. And then the mayor being out of the country when the fires broke out symbolized the city being out of touch and not engaged. And so all of that, I think, is where we are right now for the mayor’s race, but also the way people view the city. Some of this is unfair when you look at the overall pace of response compared to other places. But the fires just showed the inability of communications with the fire department, how they deployed, all of that. It’s just a reflection of the inability of the city to respond and communicate.

We’re now at a point where we know we are going to have crises that we have not experienced before. We’re going to have coastal crises. We’re going to have more environmental crises. I don’t think we think enough about the potential for cyberattacks that could shut the city down or screw up the entire water system.

To go back to our discussion about coalitions, it doesn’t matter if you have a coalition if you don’t do anything with it. Then it’s just optics and representation. The city needs more than that. It needs action. We need strong leadership to solve some of the biggest crises we’re going to face. We’re about to face a big El Niño. Are we really prepared to take that on? Are we in communication in pushing the federal government to provide us greater resources so we can tackle some of these needs?

I think first and foremost, being the mayor of the second-largest city in the United States is a sort of right and responsibility all in itself. You absolutely have the bully pulpit. You absolutely have the ability to share your opinions. You can call upon the council to do all sorts of things. You hire general managers. You establish budgets. You appoint some seats to the Metro board, to the air quality management districts. It’s a myth that we don’t have the power. It’s just a matter of learning how to use it and being willing to use it.

The bully pulpit point is so important — we’ve seen Mayor Bass do that on a couple of occasions. With ICE, she was very strong. People heard it. They saw it. But I’m not sure in other areas we’ve seen it in the same way. Many of us are looking right now at New York City, and people are seeing what appears, at least, to be bold leadership and use of a bully pulpit in multiple ways. There is a little bit of envy and a desire to have that in our city.

There’s also an element to the job that involves diplomacy skills and a lot of soft skills to build a coalition on the City Council, to be able to build a coalition on the board of supervisors, to mobilize other mayors, to mobilize legislators so you could advance a policy at the state level. A mayor has a tremendous amount of power through appointment of general managers and commissioners, though, as well as being the most recognizable public figure in Southern California. It gives them the ability, if they are able to use it effectively, to make bold and ambitious moves.

The mayor has a lot of power on paper and controls some major entities, like power or the port. But in total, the mayor of New York has more power specifically for a few issues that cities are dealing with right now. The mayor of New York controls health, education and social welfare. The mayor of L.A. doesn’t. Those are three very important policy areas that many Angelenos believe that the mayor controls. And when you’re trying to deal with homelessness, let me tell you, it’s really tough when you don’t have health and welfare under your control.

I remain optimistic that it is possible. A lot of people believe that L.A. is ungovernable. It’s very difficult to achieve your goals when you’re not exerting that level of focus and discipline, and there’s not the engagement, there’s not the communication. I think there are ways to identify some simple, quick wins that, if I were advising her, I would sit down and say, three to five things, what can we do infrastructure-wise? It’s not sexy, but Zohran Mamdani is doing it. He’s fixing the play equipment in New York City. He’s getting after Amazon for their unpaid parking tickets.

I just want to say that as a person who is a millennial in this city and a renter, the biggest frustration is that the city does not work, meaning that there’s potholes, the sidewalks don’t work, that El Niño’s going to come, it’s going to be flooded. And the question is: Why are you paying so much money?

What I’ll add, as someone who had to vote on budgets and try to get services done, is I do not envy whoever is in office next year in trying to dramatically improve the quality of city services because it’s going to be very, very difficult. We still haven’t recovered, in terms of city services, from the Great Recession era. And the funding situation is not good.

Bass did a great job in terms of ICE. But part of it is because she hardly had to spend any money. It wasn’t budget constraints. She didn’t have to deal with the City Council on that. This was on her own, her instincts of having been a coalition builder and knowing to respond. She did a great job.

We know that undocumented immigrants generate tremendous income in our city — around $250 billion, I believe, every year. That’s 17 percent of the county’s G.D.P. The L.A. Economic Development Corporation in their survey found that 82 percent of businesses reported negative impacts. And of those experiencing declines in revenue, nearly half said that those declines were over 50 percent. So I think when we’re thinking especially about Latino communities, A.A.P.I. communities impacted by ICE, we get back to the question of: How is this city delivering services for them that enable them to thrive? That’s where the rubber meets the road on this, is that it can’t just be about symbolism. It’s got to be about the delivery of services by the city as well.

The mayor does have to thread a needle when it comes to the president of the United States, whoever that is. I think the mayor has a duty to stand up for their citizens and to speak out against what’s morally wrong. But at the same time, they can’t afford to be an ideologue all the time. The job requires that the mayor solve problems and deliver city services. So that might take a different approach, a different strategy, depending on what the need is, whether it’s working behind the scenes, in front of the scenes to get to solutions with the federal administration. Sometimes that’s being inspirational and taking a moral stand. And sometimes it’s being a pragmatist.

Just don’t poke the bear. Basically, ignore Trump unless it’s about ICE, unless it’s about the Olympics. Don’t give in to Trump just because of the Olympics. He’s going to want to make it a showcase for himself anyway; he will be investing money in that. And if not, that’s the risk we’re going to have to take. I wouldn’t give up the soul or the identity of L.A. just because the Olympics might have a cost overrun.

L.A. is a city that you have to find. There are hidden pockets of nature; there’s urban grit; there’s every ethnicity and all the food and all the things. But you have to go find it. It operates very much like a small town in a lot of ways. The politics are very hyperlocal.

L.A. is the epitome of everything that the Trump administration is against. Cultural diversity — we have a large population of foreign-born people. We have creative capital that’s not seen anywhere else in the world. And we have a vibrant democracy where, on a cultural level, on a citywide level, people come together all the time, every single day.

L.A. is one of the most diverse and segregated cities in America. But the beauty of Los Angeles is that it is filled with people who believe that the possible is possible. We show up because we believe the possible is possible for everyone, even though we are very diverse and segregated.

L.A. remakes itself constantly, and we are a city of entrepreneurs. And I don’t mean that just economically, but also socially, culturally, in every single way except for city government. And that’s the disconnect. We are a bunch of cultural, social, economic entrepreneurs, and city government is not.

Whoever takes office needs to have a tremendous amount of courage. I know we gave a lot of credit to Mayor Bass, but the real people that stood up to ICE were your everyday citizens. It was people getting arrested, getting deported in some cases. There’s so much a mayor can do. But how does a mayor take the cues from their citizens? It’s this big city that’s very diverse and very complex. We disagree on a lot. But there are certain things that we will all stand by. We’re an immigrant city. And we’re going to stand by our people.

A Voter’s Guide to the Michigan Senate Primary

A Voter’s Guide to the California Governor Primary

A Voter’s Guide to the Texas Senate Republican Primary

Opinion’s Editor on Making The Choice

About our panel
