================================================================================
flydubai-flight-israel-plane-pilots.html
Source: RenderedHtml  Paragraphs: 141  Words: 5390
================================================================================

SUMMARY

Investigators on Thursday were trying to determine what motivated the co-pilot on a flight from Dubai to Tel Aviv to stab the pilot, forcing the plane to make an emergency landing after passengers and crew members bravely rushed the cockpit to avert a midair catastrophe. The government of the United Arab Emirates said on Thursday that it would take the lead in the investigation into whether the incident on the FlyDubai flight on Wednesday was linked to terrorism. In an interview with Fox News, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel suggested that the co-pilot, who has not been identified but who Israeli officials have said is an Omani citizen, may have been ideologically motivated.

ARTICLE

Investigators Seek to Establish Motive in FlyDubai Attack
The United Arab Emirates said it would lead the investigation, including into possible links to terrorism. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel said the attacker had undergone “Islamist radical indoctrination,” though he did not elaborate.
By Isabel Kershner, Leo Sands, Heedo Abu Laban, Ismaeel Naar, Johnatan Reiss, Vivian Nereim, Niraj Chokshi, Karla Adam, Somini Sengupta, Suhasini Raj, Mujib Mashal and Pranav Baskar
Published 2026-10-01 09:32 UTC
https://www.nytimes.com/live/2026/10/01/world/flydubai-flight-israel-plane-pilots

Latest

Here’s the latest.

Investigators on Thursday were trying to determine what motivated the co-pilot on a flight from Dubai to Tel Aviv to stab the pilot, forcing the plane to make an emergency landing after passengers and crew members bravely rushed the cockpit to avert a midair catastrophe.

The government of the United Arab Emirates said on Thursday that it would take the lead in the investigation into whether the incident on the FlyDubai flight on Wednesday was linked to terrorism.

In an interview with Fox News, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel suggested that the co-pilot, who has not been identified but who Israeli officials have said is an Omani citizen, may have been ideologically motivated. “We know that he underwent Islamist radical indoctrination,” Mr. Netanyahu said, adding that investigators had learned this from the man’s “personal information.” He did not provide further details.

Mr. Netanyahu had earlier told Fox News that the attacker was being investigated in Saudi Arabia and would likely be transferred to the Emirates. “And we’ll be following, and possibly also participating in this investigation,” he said.

The pilot, Capt. Smit Machchhar, an Indian citizen who survived the attack, has been airlifted to Abu Dhabi, the Emirati capital, according to two officials familiar with the matter, after receiving treatment in Saudi Arabia. The Indian Embassy in the Emirates said Mr. Machchhar was recovering and in good health. According to witnesses, Israeli passengers helped to subdue the attacker, while a dentist on board performed first aid on Mr. Machchhar. The dentist said he had been bleeding profusely from his injuries.

On Thursday, Israelis expressed pride in the brave actions of the passengers, with newspaper headlines praising them as “Heroes in the Sky” and calling the midair rescue a “Miracle.”

Many questions remained about the attack, including whether the co-pilot had acted alone; what his motives were; and if his intention was to crash the plane or take control of it and land it in a third country. The plane plunged thousands of feet in minutes and was forced to land in Saudi Arabia after the co-pilot stabbed the captain, according to witnesses and officials.

Two reserve pilots on board were credited with stabilizing the plane and landing it safely at Tabuk airport in Saudi Arabia.

Mr. Netanyahu told CNN on Wednesday night that the actions of Mr. Machchhar, the Israeli passengers and the two reserve pilots “managed to prevent a 9/11 disaster,” referring to the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001.

Four passengers on board also held dual Israeli-American citizenship, according to a U.S. official.

Here’s what we’re covering:

2 passengers who helped thwart the FlyDubai attack add details in a TV interview.

Two Israeli passengers who helped thwart the midair attack on a FlyDubai flight on Wednesday described the ordeal on Israel’s Channel 12 television a day later, recalling the harrowing moments that forced them into action as the aircraft pitched into a sudden dive.

The two men, Tzvika Manes and Asaf Rajuan, described the chaotic scene that began when Mr. Manes’s wife, Tali, screamed while waiting outside the lavatory near the cockpit with their 6-year-old daughter. “He’s stabbing him!” she cried out.

The plane began to lose altitude, and Mr. Manes said his daughters wailed, “Dad, we don’t want to die.” He said, “That was the trigger that made me run inside.” He recalled entering the cockpit, which was splattered with blood.

Mr. Manes and Mr. Rajuan burst into the flight deck, along with another passenger named Yariv and an off-duty pilot who happened to be on board. The flight’s captain had been badly injured by his co-pilot but had still managed to unlock the cockpit door, despite losing blood. Together, the men pulled the wounded pilot to safety, then overpowered his assailant and tied him up. The plane was pulled out of its dive.

Reflecting on the desperate struggle as the airplane full of passengers hurtled toward earth, Mr. Rajuan said that the reality of what they had done was only now setting in. There were 174 passengers and 8 crew on board.

“You don’t think about what you’ve done,” he said, adding: “You just go and do it, almost like a mission. As the days go by, we’ll understand that we managed to save many lives.”

FlyDubai finds itself under scrutiny in Israel.

For almost six years since signing the U.S.-brokered Abraham Accords to normalize relations with Israel, the United Arab Emirates has maintained a steadfast relationship with the country, despite a fierce backlash from some of its Arab neighbors.

Commercial ties were one demonstration of that relationship, and direct flights between the countries became a frequently cited example of their growing links. But the attack in the cockpit of a FlyDubai flight traveling from Dubai to Tel Aviv on Wednesday has brought renewed scrutiny of their relationship.

Questions are swirling over what prompted the attack, in which witnesses say the co-pilot stabbed the pilot and passengers and crew members rushed the cockpit to avert a midair catastrophe. The plane made an emergency landing in Saudi Arabia.

The Emirates has said it is leading the investigation into the attack, including any potential links to terrorism, and FlyDubai has suspended the service between Dubai and Tel Aviv. Israel’s Ministry of Transportation said in a statement on Thursday that the suspension was also a directive from Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu at the recommendation of the head of Shin Bet, Israel’s internal security agency.

Some Israeli officials are also intensifying scrutiny of the airline.

Some Israelis have proved reluctant to fly on the airline after the attack. El Al, Israel’s flagship carrier, said on Thursday that it would start special flights to bring Israelis back from the Emirates.

FlyDubai became the first Emirati airline to fly to Tel Aviv in November 2020, roughly two months after Israel and the United Arab Emirates signed the Abraham Accords. At a ceremony to commemorate the first flight, Mr. Netanyahu of Israel called the inauguration of the route a “pivotal moment.”

By 2024, FlyDubai had become the second-largest foreign carrier operating out of Tel Aviv’s Ben Gurion International Airport, carrying more than 500,000 passengers that year, according to Israeli government data. By 2025, the number of passengers had increased to more than 800,000.

FlyDubai’s importance grew this year, as other airlines, including El Al, suspended flights between the Emirates and Israel because of the U.S.-Israeli war with Iran in February. It also continued to fly to Tel Aviv during Israel’s war in Gaza, when other regional airlines suspended flights.

Israel’s first ambassador to the United Arab Emirates, Amir Hayek, who served in the position until October 2024, praised FlyDubai on Wednesday and defended the company for continuing to fly to Israel when others stopped or limited service after the start of the Iran war. “The UAE and the airline deserve for us to set aside speculation and allow them to thoroughly investigate what actually happened,” he wrote on social media. “I trust them.”

But Mr. Netanyahu has raised questions about how FlyDubai operates. In an interview with Fox News on Thursday, the prime minister said that the co-pilot was an Omani citizen and asserted that the Israeli authorities prohibited pilots from countries unfriendly to Israel from flying into the country. “We have constraints that say you can’t have pilots from countries that don’t have diplomatic relations with Israel,” he said. Oman and Israel do not have diplomatic relations.

It is unclear what the requirements are for flights between the Emirates and Israel since air travel commenced between the two countries.

FlyDubai’s press office declined to respond to several questions on Thursday. In a statement on Wednesday, it said the motives behind the attack were under investigation. “We urge all parties to refrain from premature speculation while authorities gather the facts,” the company said.

Israelis take pride in the brave passengers who saved Flight 1073 from disaster.

Israelis were buoyed on Thursday by the brave actions of several Israeli passengers who, along with crew members, averted a midair disaster aboard a FlyDubai flight to Tel Aviv the day before.

Hebrew newspaper headlines dwelled more on the heroism of the passengers and crew than on the moments of terror after the plane’s co-pilot attacked the pilot in the cockpit, causing the aircraft to plummet nearly 17,000 feet.

Several passengers sprang forward and overpowered the co-pilot, who appeared to be trying to crash the plane, according to witnesses and officials.

“Heroes in the Sky,” read the headlines in two large-circulation morning papers. “Miracle on Flight 1073,” read another.

The dramatic events evoked for some Israelis the days in the 1960s and 1970s when Israel was widely considered to be a small, plucky country that had survived against the odds and took on hijackers.

The Israeli commando raid in 1976 that rescued more than 100 hostages from Entebbe, Uganda, became legendary and spawned several movies. Their Air France flight from Tel Aviv to Paris had been hijacked by Palestinian militants aided by German extremists.

Yonatan (Yoni) Netanyahu, the older brother of Israel’s current prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, led the commandos and was the only Israeli soldier killed in the raid.

Four years earlier, Benjamin Netanyahu, then a young commando himself, took part in a raid that freed hostages held by Palestinian hijackers on a Sabena jet as it sat on the tarmac near Tel Aviv.

But on Wednesday, in the skies above Saudi Arabia between Dubai and Tel Aviv, the saviors were ordinary citizens and crew members, including the injured pilot.

The Israeli passengers who rushed to the cockpit included a man Mr. Netanyahu said was a plumber who led the rescue and a dentist who treated the pilot and helped restrain the assailant.

After the Hamas-led attack on Israel on Oct. 7, 2023, civilians stepped up, for example by delivering military equipment and water.

That attack ignited a devastating war in Gaza. Israel’s actions there have drawn international criticism and accusations of war crimes, leaving the country increasingly isolated.

But after the FlyDubai episode, Israeli social media was flooded with memes offering advice to air travelers: In case of emergency, locate the nearest Israeli.

Yair Golan, the leader of Israel’s left-leaning Democrats party and a former deputy military chief, said in a social media post that he was “filled with pride” as details emerged about “the brave Israelis who, in a moment of danger, displayed ingenuity and exceptional courage.”

Mr. Netanyahu told Fox News on Wednesday, after the passengers had returned safely to Tel Aviv, that if you are hijacked, “make sure you have an Israeli sitting next to you.”

The Boeing 737 Max 8 stayed intact despite the enormous stress of its plunge.

The FlyDubai plane whose co-pilot attacked its pilot on Wednesday plunged more than 16,000 feet in 30 seconds, according to data from the tracking site Flightradar24, a descent that an aviation expert said put the jet under substantial structural stress.

Yet, the jet, a Boeing 737 Max 8, stayed largely intact.

“I’m very impressed that the plane held together as much as it did,” said Tony Farina, a specialist in flight projectile design and an adjunct professor at Embry‑Riddle Aeronautical University, a private institution with campuses in Florida and Arizona. “Kudos to Boeing for that design.”

During the unplanned descent, the forces on the jet would have increased dramatically. “As it was speeding up, the forces were going up tremendously,” Dr. Farina said.

President Trump also praised Boeing overnight in a social media post, saying that the plane’s durability was “an amazing show of precise and powerful structural planning and design.”

Noting that only limited information was available, he said that the plane may even have approached the speed of sound. Had it reached that velocity, Dr. Farina said, the plane could have become less stable and harder to control.

But Dr. Farina cautioned that it was difficult to say with certainty what speeds the plane had reached without knowing important details like its angle during the fall, the wind speed and the temperature of air around it. The plane’s flight data recorder should provide a much clearer picture of what happened, he said.

Photos shared on social media of the plane on the tarmac at the Saudi airport where it made an emergency landing show a damaged rudder, but it will probably take some time to understand the full extent of the damage.

“That plane is going to definitely need a full inspection,” he said. “My suspicion is they probably would never use it again.”

Boeing declined to comment.

Investigators seek to answer a central question: How did a weapon enter the cockpit?

The authorities in Israel and the United Arab Emirates were trying to understand on Thursday how a weapon entered the cockpit of the diverted FlyDubai flight to Tel Aviv, as they investigated the co-pilot’s stabbing of the captain.

Many questions remain unanswered about the attack, including the attacker’s motive, his ultimate intention and how he came to have a weapon. As the plane plunged thousands of feet while en route from Dubai on Wednesday morning, passengers and crew members rushed the cockpit and took control of the aircraft, a Boeing 737, and two reserve pilots on board landed it at an airport in Tabuk, in northwestern Saudi Arabia.

The co-pilot, whom Israeli officials identified only as an Omani national, was arrested by the Saudi authorities. The airport in Tabuk said that two pilots were treated for injuries. All the passengers were flown to Israel in another FlyDubai plane.

In an interview with on “Fox & Friends” on Thursday, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said that he did not know what weapon the attacker used or how he was able to access it in the cockpit.

The authorities were exploring two possibilities, Mr. Netanyahu said: The co-pilot smuggled the weapon through Dubai’s airport security by evading a metal detector or he used a sharp object that was stored aboard the plane, such as an ax.

“He could have carried a knife or an ax, or he might have gotten an ax from the equipment that might be standard on this airplane,” said Mr. Netanyahu, who cautioned that it was too soon to know for certain.

Marco Chan, a retired airline pilot who teaches aviation operations at Kingston University in London, said on Thursday that Mr. Netanyahu was referring to a “crash ax.”

According to Mr. Chan, who flew for Cathay Pacific and Hong Kong Airlines for 10 years, the cockpits of commercial airliners are typically equipped with axes, which crew members are trained to use to break open the fuselage in emergencies.

On a Boeing 737, as with other models, Mr. Chan said, crash axes are typically stored inside the cockpit directly behind the co-pilot, under a cover but without a lock.

“It’s sharp,” he said. “When we can’t open the door, we would use a crash ax in a location where the external structure of the airplane is slightly weaker, using the ax to break the fuselage open to escape.”

Mr. Chan said that the interior of the cabin is typically marked to show where the wall is slightly weaker, directing crew members where to aim the ax in an emergency evacuation.

The Emirati authorities, who are leading the investigation into the attack, have not provided detailed information on their progress, including any suggestion about the type of weapon that might have been used and how it entered the cockpit.

A spokesman for FlyDubai declined on Thursday to respond to questions about security protocols on its flights to Israel from Dubai.

Israeli politicians use FlyDubai attack to try to score points in this month’s election.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel is in a tight race with a national election approaching, and his supporters and opponents quickly seized on Wednesday’s narrowly averted disaster on a FlyDubai flight to Tel Aviv.

Hours before the mostly Israeli passengers on the plane, Flight 1073 from Dubai, had even made it home, Mr. Netanyahu’s defense minister hinted that he and Mr. Netanyahu had tried to warn of some kind of attack.

“When the prime minister and I sound warnings and security alerts based on intelligence,” the minister, Israel Katz, said in a statement, “it is worth you — our outside enemies and out-of-the-loop formers from within — listening and taking them seriously.” By “formers,” he meant former officials.

On Tuesday, a day before the crisis aboard the FlyDubai flight, Mr. Netanyahu was filmed at an Israeli Air Force base saying, “We have indications that, ahead of the elections, our enemies will try to attack us.”

But neither Mr. Netanyahu nor Mr. Katz provided any specifics with their warnings, leading opponents to dismiss the admonitions as election spinning and fear mongering.

Naftali Bennett, a right-wing political leader who is running to replace Mr. Netanyahu, had criticized the prime minister’s broad warning. On Tuesday, he said on Israeli television that he could get alerts from a phone app and asked what the prime minister was doing to thwart the threats.

On Wednesday’s flight, several passengers and crew members overcame the co-pilot, who was stabbing the captain, according to witnesses and officials. The plane was sent into a nosedive, but two reserve pilots on board the flight have been credited with landing it safely in Saudi Arabia. Investigators have been seeking to determine a motive for the attack.

Yair Lapid, a centrist opposition leader, said in a social media post on Thursday that he had received a security briefing from the prime minister late on Tuesday night. Without going into details about the classified briefing, Mr. Lapid said that from what he heard then, “There was no reason for panic,” adding that the threats Mr. Netanyahu had laid out were nothing new.

“There was no mention of a scenario of a plane hijacking,” Mr. Lapid said. “Not anything like it. Nothing.”

Mr. Netanyahu, Israel’s longest serving prime minister, has been struggling to maintain his reputation as the country’s national security czar, amid reports of the policy, military and intelligence failures leading up to the deadly Hamas assault on Israel on Oct. 7, 2023, which ignited a devastating war in Gaza and conflicts across the Middle East.

Much of the campaign for the Oct. 27 general election, which many Israelis and outside observers consider to be the most consequential vote in the country’s history, has focused on what Mr. Netanyahu knew and when.

After nightfall on Wednesday, Mr. Netanyahu went to Tel Aviv’s Ben Gurion International Airport to greet the passengers of Flight 1073 when they landed. He spoke on camera with one of the Israelis who had subdued the attacker and credited the courageous actions of passengers and crew members for saving the day.

The Israeli president will honor the passengers who helped to avert the flight disaster.

President Isaac Herzog of Israel on Thursday said that he would recommend five citizens for the country’s highest civilian award for heroism after they intervened to help stop a midair disaster on a flight from Dubai to Tel Aviv.

Mr. Herzog said the swift actions of the passengers, who he identified as Yaniv Hayoun, Shota Musayev, Tzvika Manes, his wife Tali Manes, and Asaf Rajuan, helped save the lives of more than 170 people aboard FlyDubai Flight 1073 on Wednesday.

“You put yourselves at risk to save others and prevented a terrible disaster,” Mr. Herzog said in a statement released by his office.

During a violent struggle in the cockpit, the plane’s co-pilot stabbed the Indian pilot, Capt. Smit Machchhar, according to passengers and Israeli officials. Ms. Manes raised the alarm when she heard commotion coming from the cockpit, according to the president’s office. She alerted other passengers and called two off-duty pilots seated in the rear of the cabin to come to the cockpit. The pilots helped to regain control of the aircraft, passengers and officials said.

In a social media post, Mr. Herzog said he offered “warm thanks” to the pilot and the reserve pilots for what he said was their courage and resourcefulness. “The State of Israel extends immense gratitude to you,” he added, addressing Mr. Machchhar.

Mr. Manes forced open the cockpit door along with Mr. Hayoun, a plumber, and Mr. Rajuan, after the captain had managed to unlatch it. The passengers then tackled the assailant.

Mr. Hayoun told Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in a televised conversation on Wednesday that while the other passengers were working to overpower the attacker, he “grabbed the controls and started pulling back the handles,” trying to mimic maneuvers he had seen on television. Mr. Manes said in interviews with Israeli outlets that it took roughly 20 to 25 minutes for the passengers to fully subdue and bind the co-pilot, using corded headphones from the plane’s entertainment system.

Dr. Musayev, a dentist, treated the pilot for what he described as severe wounds to his head and cuts to his fingers, providing what the president’s office described as “lifesaving medical treatment.”

“It was an extraordinary incident. We felt helpless, suspended in midair, and I didn’t know who to turn to,” Mr. Rajuan told the president, according the statement from Mr. Herzog’s office. “But it was all instinct: to survive, to save the family, the people, and the children.”

The Presidential Award for Civilian Heroism was established by Mr. Herzog in the aftermath of the Hamas-led attacks of Oct. 7, 2023, to honor civilians who demonstrated extraordinary bravery to save lives.

How fraught Middle East geopolitics could complicate the FlyDubai investigation.

The government of the United Arab Emirates on Thursday said that it would take the lead in the investigation into the attack aboard the FlyDubai flight traveling from Dubai to Tel Aviv that was forced to land in Saudi Arabia a day earlier.

But as the authorities across the Middle East try to piece together why one pilot attacked another in the cockpit, causing the aircraft to plummet by 17,000 feet in under two minutes, they are tackling a cross-border mystery with dizzying geopolitical complications.

The flight took off from Dubai, the Emirates’ largest city, where the pilots worked for a government-owned carrier. But it made an emergency landing in Saudi Arabia, where both pilots were hospitalized, and almost all of its passengers were from Israel.

Israel and Saudi Arabia do not have formal diplomatic relations, leaving little precedent for how they might cooperate in a criminal investigation.

Separately, Saudi Arabia and the Emirates are regional rivals with their own political tensions. Both the Saudi and Emirati authorities also operate very opaquely, and typically release minimal information to the public about investigations.

The Emirati government’s announcement that it would lead the investigation offered few details. The comments were published by the country’s state news agency, and said that the attorney general has formed a team to examine the incident, including to determine any motives, whether it had been planned in advance and whether there were any terrorist connections.

The Emirates has jurisdiction to conduct the investigation, even though the incident happened outside its borders, because the plane was registered in the country and flew under its flag, the statement said. It did not say where the pilot who has been accused of carrying out the attack was being held.

Almost all of the information about what happened on the plane has come from Israeli officials and passengers.

On Wednesday, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel said that an attacker had been arrested and “is being interrogated at the moment by Saudi authorities.” He told Fox News that the attacker would be transferred to the Emirates.

The Saudi authorities have said nothing about an arrest or interrogation. On Wednesday, officials at the Saudi airport where the plane landed said in a statement that the plane’s captain and first officer were injured and were taken to a hospital to receive medical care.

The Saudi authorities have also not mentioned Israel at all.

The Saudi government did not respond to a request for comment.

The Indian pilot who was stabbed while fending off his assailant is hailed as a hero.

Capt. Smit Machchhar, the Indian pilot hailed for averting a catastrophe on a FlyDubai flight, had faced a few challenges in the cockpit before. Monsoon rains. Fast-changing wind speeds. And the biggest challenge of all, he recalled on a podcast last year: preparing to land after a passenger went into labor on board.

“There was a sense of urgency,” he said. “In my head, I had zero margin of error.”

None compared to the bloody midair horror he found himself in on Wednesday, when witnesses and officials say a fellow pilot stabbed him in the cockpit of a Dubai to Tel Aviv flight on Wednesday.

Mr. Machchhar, bleeding, managed to open the cockpit door, allowing passengers and crew to overpower the assailant, while two others on board who had flying experience landed the plane in Saudi Arabia.

One passenger said he heard bloodcurdling screams before Mr. Machchhar fell out of the cockpit.

Israeli officials said his co-pilot had apparently tried to crash the plane, with 170 passengers on board. Neither the authorities in the United Arab Emirates, where the flight originated, nor in Saudi Arabia, where the aircraft touched down, have commented on what happened. The Emirati Attorney General’s office on Thursday announced an investigation.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India hailed the captain as a “hero” whose “valor helped save hundreds of lives and avert a great tragedy.”

“In the face of the gravest danger and despite being seriously injured, he showed immense courage and an unwavering resolve to protect the lives of others,” Mr. Modi said on X.

Mr. Machchhar has been airlifted to Abu Dhabi, the Emirati capital, according to two officials familiar with the matter. The Indian Embassy in the Emirates said on social media that the ambassador had visited Mr. Machchhar and his family at the hospital. “Captain Machchhar is in good health and recovering well,” it said.

As Indians rallied around him on Thursday, a portrait emerged of a pilot who found his calling somewhat accidentally, only to end up flying commercial planes for 13 years and later training aspiring pilots at an aviation school.

He grew up in a middle-class suburb of Mumbai, called Ghatkopar, not far from the city’s international airport. Journalists crowded on Thursday near his childhood home in an ordinary neighborhood, its streets lined with auto rickshaws and vegetable carts. A news conference planned with the pilot’s uncle was canceled and a local politician, Parag Shah, said his parents had flown to Dubai in the morning.

Mr. Machchhar attended a neighborhood school, and was set to join the family textiles business. His destiny changed when he attended a seminar on aviation.

“That is where the aviation bug bit me,” he said on the podcast, saying that flying had not been a childhood dream.

He said his mother was nervous.

“You didn’t hear a lot of people becoming pilots, no one had any idea how to do it,” he said. “So first of all, that was something that scared my mom — and of course, the flying bit.”

He enrolled in an 18-month program at a New Zealand-based aviation training school, called Mainland. Its director, Philip Kean, described the program as combining academic rigor and practical training.

“You’ve got to study. You’ve got to fly the plane,” Mr. Kean said. “He was a good student — a good average student. He did his job. He got his commercial license, which he had come here for.”

He began as a first officer, rose to the rank of captain, and according to Dhaval Patel, who knew him from school, soon became a trainer of other pilots at Spice Jet, a private Indian airline that has since folded.

He became a mentor to Mr. Patel, who also worked as a pilot. He was passionate about training other pilots. “He would also ensure that the pilot is confident enough to execute the job well,” said Mr. Patel, who now works in his family’s diamonds business.

“Everything is behind you and you should look ahead,” Mr. Patel recalled him saying many years ago, “because when you are flying, you always look ahead.”

Mr. Machchhar trains aspiring pilots as part of a private aviation school, called Fly By Aviation.

“You should be ready to multitask,” he says in a video directed at aspiring pilots on the school’s Facebook page.

Although the captain does not appear to have much of a public presence on social media, glimpses of his personality and his outlook could be gleaned from interviews. Some of them are striking to read in the aftermath of the FlyDubai incident.

In the hourlong podcast, posted last year, Mr. Machchhar said he avoided “deep discussions” with his colleagues in the cockpit, so as not to be distracted, and said pilots should get plenty of rest so they can perform under challenging situations.

“You have to perform. There’s no alternative,” he said.

Asked to describe his feelings about being a pilot in one word, he replied, “blessed.”

A passenger who helped subdue the attacker describes a bloody scene in the cockpit.

Tzvika Manes, a passenger seated in the front row of FlyDubai Flight 1073 to Tel Aviv on Wednesday, said he heard bloodcurdling screams from the cockpit as the aircraft plunged toward the Saudi desert.

In an interview with The New York Times on Wednesday, Mr. Manes recounted leaping from his seat to retrieve his 6-year-old daughter from the bathroom. The cockpit door was partly open. A pilot, bloodied with stab wounds, had lurched out and was locked in a melee with the plane’s other pilot, he said.

Mr. Manes said he was one of three passengers who subdued the aggressive pilot in a midair struggle, narrowly averting catastrophe. He gave a harrowing account of what happened inside the cockpit, as they wrestled the pilot pressing the attack and landed the plane, in a brief telephone interview.

The compartment itself was disheveled, spattered with blood, he said. The pilot who was attacked — who Mr. Manes said appeared to be Indian — was so badly injured that Mr. Manes said he was amazed that the man had managed to escape from the pilots’ compartment.

“The Indian pilot was struggling — he managed to open the door to get help to save himself,” said Mr. Manes, who added that the bleeding pilot fell out of the cockpit as the other pilot was on top of him, stabbing him.

Then, Mr. Manes said, he and two other passengers “jumped on” the armed pilot and grappled with him to stop the attack. They used the cables from the flight’s headphone sets to tie up the pilot and restrain him, Mr. Manes said.

Meanwhile, passengers on the flight shrieked in terror as the plane quickly lost altitude, with people “flying out of their seats,” before the plane stabilized, Mr. Manes said. He described the scene as traumatic and like a “horror movie.”

After the pilot was restrained, other passengers on the flight with flying experience took control of the aircraft and landed it, Mr. Manes said.

The plane arrived in Tabuk, Saudi Arabia, where passengers disembarked, some of them in bloodstained clothing. They waited for a replacement aircraft sent by FlyDubai to continue to Tel Aviv. By Wednesday night, all the passengers had arrived safely in Israel.

Israeli officials said on Wednesday that much about the flight remained unclear, including what motivated the attacking pilot and whether it was specifically an attack on Israelis, as many people in Israel — including some in the government — quickly concluded. The country has been increasingly isolated over the wars in Gaza and Iran and antisemitic attacks are on the rise.

A FlyDubai spokesperson urged all parties “to refrain from premature speculation while authorities gather the facts.” The airline later said it was suspending all flights to and from Israel pending an investigation into the episode.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel would later identify the pilot who was stabbed as Capt. Smit Machchhar, an Indian citizen. “Despite being stabbed and seriously injured, he fought back, resisted, opened the cockpit door and enabled passengers and crew to overpower the attacker — preventing a catastrophic midair disaster,” Mr. Netanyahu said.

The Indian Embassy in Riyadh confirmed the pilot’s identity and said in a statement that he was in a hospital in Tabuk in stable condition.
